::Activity Intolerance/risk for Activity Intolerance::

::Definition::
Activity Intolerance: Insufficient physiological or psychological energy to endure or complete required or desired daily activities.

risk for Activity Intolerance: Susceptible to experiencing insufficient physiological or psychological energy to endure or complete required or desired daily activities, which may compromise health.

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
-To identify causative/precipitating or risk factors:
1. Note presence of acute or chronic illness, such as heart failure, pulmonary disorders, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, AIDS, anemias, cancers, pregnancy-induced hypertension, and acute and chronic pain. Many factors can cause or contribute to fatigue, having potential to interfere with client’s ability to perform at a desired level of activity. However, the term “activity intolerance” implies that the client cannot endure or adapt to increased energy or oxygen demands caused by an activity. (Refer to ND Fatigue.) 
2. Ask client/significant other (SO) about usual level of energy to identify potential problems and/or client’s/SO’s perception of client’s energy and ability to perform needed or desired activities.
3. Evaluate the client’s actual and perceived limitations and severity of deficit in light of usual status. This provides a comparative baseline and information about needed education or interventions regarding quality of life.
4. Identify factors, such as age, functional decline, client resistive to efforts, painful conditions, breathing problems, vision or hearing impairments, climate or weather, unsafe areas to exercise, and need for mobility assistance that could block/affect the desired level of activity.
5. Note client reports of weakness, fatigue, pain, difficulty accomplishing tasks, and/or insomnia. Symptoms may be a result of or contribute to intolerance of activity.
6. Assess cardiopulmonary response to physical activity, including vital signs before, during, and after activity. Note accelerating fatigue. Dramatic changes in heart rate and rhythm, changes in usual blood pressure, and progressively worsening fatigue result from an imbalance of oxygen supply and demand.
7. Ascertain the client’s ability to stand and move about and the degree of assistance necessary or use of equipment to determine current status and needs associated with participation in needed/desired activities.
8. Identify activity needs versus desires to evaluate appropriateness (e.g., is barely able to walk upstairs but would like to play tennis).
9. Assess emotional and psychological factors affecting the current situation (e.g., stress and/or depression may be increasing the effects of an illness, or depression might be the result of forced inactivity).
10. Note treatment-related factors, such as side effects and interactions of medications, which can affect the nature and degree of activity intolerance.
11. Determine the client’s current activity level and physical condition with observation, exercise-capacity testing, or use of a functional-level classifi cation system (e.g., Gordon’s), as appropriate. This provides a baseline for comparison and an opportunity to track changes.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
1.
2.

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
1.
2.

=====