::Anxiety: mild, moderate, severe, panic::

::Definition::
Vague uneasy feeling of discomfort or dread accompanied by an autonomic response (the source is often nonspecific or unknown to the individual); a feeling of apprehension caused by anticipation of danger. It is an alerting sign that warns of impending danger and enables the individual to take measures to deal with that threat.

::Action/Interventions:: 
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
To assess level of anxiety:
1. Review familial and physiological factors (e.g., genetic depressive factors), psychiatric illness, active medical conditions (e.g., thyroid problems, metabolic imbalances, cardiopulmonary disease, anemia, or dysrhythmias), and recent/ongoing stressors (e.g., family member illness or death, spousal confl ict/abuse, or loss of job). These factors can cause/exacerbate anxiety and anxiety disorders.
2. Determine current prescribed medications and recent drug history of prescribed or over-the-counter (OTC) medications (e.g., steroids, thyroid preparations, weight loss pills, or caffeine). These medications can heighten feelings and sense of anxiety.
3. Identify the client’s perception of the threat represented by the situation. Distorted perceptions of the situation may magnify feelings. Understanding client’s point of view promotes a more accurate plan of care.
4. Note cultural factors that may infl uence anxiety. Individual responses are infl uenced by cultural values and beliefs and culturally learned patterns of their family of origin.
5. Monitor vital signs (e.g., rapid or irregular pulse, rapid breathing/hyperventilation, changes in blood pressure, diaphoresis, tremors, or restlessness) to identify physical responses associated with both medical and emotional conditions.
6. Observe behaviors that can point to the client’s level of anxiety:
[Mild]
-- Alert, more aware of environment, attention focused on environment and immediate events
-- Restless; irritable; wakeful; reports of insomnia
-- Motivated to deal with existing problems in this state
[Moderate]
-- Perception narrower, concentration increased, able to ignore distractions in dealing with problem(s)
-- Voice quivers or changes pitch
-- Trembling, increased pulse/respirations
- Severe
-- Range of perception is reduced, anxiety interferes with effective functioning
-- Preoccupied with feelings of discomfort, sense of impending doom
-- Increased pulse/respirations with reports of dizziness, tingling
sensations, headaches, and so forth
[Panic]
-- The ability to concentrate is disrupted; behavior is disintegrated; and the client distorts the situation and does not have realistic perceptions of what is happening. The client may be experiencing terror or confusion or be unable to speak or move (paralyzed with fear).
- Note reports of insomnia or excessive sleeping, limited/avoidance of interactions with others, and use of alcohol or other drugs that can be abused, which may be behavioral indicators of use of withdrawal to deal with problems.
- Review results of diagnostic tests (e.g., drug screens, cardiac testing, complete blood count, and chemistry panel), which may point to physiological sources of anxiety.
- Be aware of defense mechanisms being used (e.g., denial or regression) that interfere with ability to deal with problem.
- Identify coping skills the individual is currently using, such as anger, daydreaming, forgetfulness, overeating, smoking, or lack of problem solving.
- Review coping skills used in the past to determine those that might be helpful in current circumstances.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
To assist client with identifying feelings and beginning to deal with problems:
1. Establish a therapeutic relationship, conveying empathy and unconditional positive regard. Note : The nurse needs to be aware of his or her own feelings of anxiety or uneasiness, exercising care to avoid the contagious effect or transmission of anxiety.
2. Be available to the client for listening and talking. Establishes rapport, promotes expression of feelings, and helps client/signifi cant other look at realities of the illness or treatment without confronting issues they are not ready to deal with.
3. Encourage the client to acknowledge and to express feelings,
such as crying (sadness), laughing (fear or denial), or swearing (fear or anger).
4. Assist the client in developing self-awareness of verbal and nonverbal behaviors. Becoming aware helps client to control these behaviors and begin to deal with issues that are causing anxiety.
5. Clarify the meanings of feelings and actions by providing feedback and checking meaning with the client.
6. Acknowledge anxiety/fear. Do not deny or reassure client that everything will be all right. Validates reality of feelings. False reassurances may be interpreted as lack of understanding or dishonesty, further isolating client.
7. Provide accurate information about the situation. This helps the client identify what is reality based.
8. Be truthful, avoid bribing, and provide physical comfort (e.g., hugging or rocking) when dealing with a child to soothe fears and provide assurance.
9. Provide comfort measures (e.g., calm/quiet environment, soft music, a warm bath, or a back rub).
10. Modify procedures as much as possible (e.g., substitute oral for intramuscular medications or combine blood draws/use finger-stick method) to limit the degree of stress and avoid overwhelming a child or anxious adult.
11 Manage environmental factors, such as harsh lighting and high traffic flow, which may be confusing and stressful to older individuals.
12. Accept the client as is. The client may need to be where he or she is at this point in time, such as in denial after receiving the diagnosis of a terminal illness.
13. Allow the behavior to belong to the client; do not respond personally. The nurse may respond inappropriately, escalating the situation to a nontherapeutic interaction.
14. Assist the client to use anxiety for coping with the situation, if helpful. Moderate anxiety heightens awareness and permits the client to focus on dealing with problems.
5. Panic
-- Stay with client, maintaining a calm, confi dent manner.
- Speak in brief statements using simple words.
- Provide for nonthreatening, consistent environment/atmosphere. Minimize stimuli. Monitor visitors and interactions
to lessen the effect of transmission of feelings.
- Set limits on inappropriate behavior and help the client to
develop acceptable ways of dealing with anxiety.
NOTE: Staff may need to provide safe controls and environment
until client regains control.
- Gradually increase activities/involvement with others as
anxiety is decreased.
- Use cognitive therapy to focus on or correct faulty catastrophic interpretations of physical symptoms.
- Administer medications (anti-anxiety agents/sedatives), as
ordered. 

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    To provide measures to comfort and aid client to handle problematic situations:
1. Provide comfort measures (e.g., calm or quiet environment, soft music, warm bath, back rub, Therapeutic Touch). Aids in meeting basic human need, decreasing sense of isolation, and assisting client to feel less anxious. 
2. Modify procedures as necessary (e.g., substitute oral for intramuscular medications, combine blood draws or use finger-stick method). Limits degree of stress and avoids overwhelming child or anxious adult.
3. Accept client as is. The client may need to be where he or she is at this point in time, such as in denial after receiving the diagnosis of a terminal illness.
4. Allow the behavior to belong to the client; do not respond personally.
5. Assist client to use anxiety for coping with the situation if helpful. Moderate anxiety heightens awareness and can help client to focus on dealing with problems.
6. Encourage awareness of negative self-talk and discuss replacing with positive statements, such as using “can” instead of “can’t,” etc.

  -- To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
    1. Assist the client in identifying precipitating factors and new methods of coping with disabling anxiety.
    2. Review happenings, thoughts, and feelings preceding the anxiety attack.
    3. Identify actions and activities the client has previously used to cope successfully when feeling nervous/anxious.
    4. List helpful resources and people, including available “hotline” or crisis managers to provide ongoing/timely support.
    5. Encourage the client to develop an exercise/activity program, which may serve to reduce the level of anxiety by relieving tension.
    6. Assist in developing skills (e.g., awareness of negative thoughts, saying “Stop,” and substituting a positive thought) to eliminate negative self-talk. Mild phobias tend to respond well to behavioral therapy.
    7. Review strategies, such as role-playing, use of visualizations to practice anticipated events, and prayer/meditation. This is useful for being prepared for/dealing with anxietyprovoking situations.
    8. Review medication regimen and possible interactions, especially with OTC drugs, other prescription drugs, and alcohol. Discuss appropriate drug substitutions, changes in dosage, or time of dose to minimize side effects.
    9. Refer to the physician for drug management alteration of the prescription regimen. Drugs that often cause symptoms of anxiety include aminophylline/theophylline, anticholinergics, dopamine, levodopa, salicylates, and steroids.
    10. Refer to individual and/or group therapy, as appropriate, to deal with chronic anxiety states.
=====