::Chronic Pain And Chronic Pain Syndrome[CPS]::

::Definition::
 - Chronic Pain : Unpleasant sensory and emotional experience arising from actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage (International Association for the Study of Pain); sudden or slow onset of any intensity, from mild to severe, constant or recurring without an anticipated or predictable end and a duration of >3 months.
 - Chronic Pain Syndrome : Recurrent or persistent pain that has lasted at least 3 months, and that significantly affects daily functioning or well-being.
 
::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess etiology/precipitating factors: 
1. Identify contributing factors (e.g., musculoskeletal trauma with lasting effects, chronic pancreatitis, cancers, arthritis, osteoporosis; peripheral neuropathies from conditions such as diabetes or AIDS, fi bromyalgia, overuse syndromes such as tendonitis, mechanical low back pain, spinal stenosis, amputation; urological disorders, ulcer disease; endometriosis, cardiovascular disease, poor circulation, recurrent migraines, bipolar disorders, depression, personality disorders). These conditions can cause, precipitate, and exacerbate persistent pain.
2. Assist in and/or review diagnostic testing, including physical (e.g., selected tests for identifying and/or monitoring suspected for known disease states; urine or blood toxicology for drug detoxifi cation or therapy; and imaging studies); neurological, psychological evaluation (e.g., Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory [MMPI], pain inventory, psychological interview). Note: While additional diagnostic studies may be indicated when advanced treatment of the client with chronic pain syndrome (CPS) is initiated, care should be exercised in avoiding duplication of tests. This prevents unnecessary costs, as well as inadvertent reinforcement of client’s psychological need for “something to be physically wrong.”
3. Evaluate for presence of/suspected psychological disorders. Psychological factors may include (and are not limited to) depression, anxiety, somatization, post-traumatic stress disorders, substance abuse, compulsive sexual behaviors, eating disorders, and bipolar personality disorders. Testing may be indicated if organic cause of pain cannot be found, or when psychological factors are known to exist, or pain problems are prolonged and/or life-limiting.
4. Evaluate emotional/psychological components of individual situation. Many painful conditions cause or exacerbate emotional responses (e.g., depression, withdrawal, agitation, anger) that worsen over time. Individuals with certain psychological syndromes (e.g., major depression, somatization disorder, hypochondriasis) may be prone to develop CPS. Note: History of past trauma (e.g., combat, domestic  violence, sexual assault, childhood neglect and physical/sexual abuse, terrorism) in people with chronic pain suggests a relationship to the development of chronic pain.
5. Evaluate client’s pattern of coping, and locus of control (internal or external). Passive and avoidant behavioral patterns or lack of active engagement in self-management activities can contribute to perpetuation of chronic pain. Individuals with external locus of control may take little or no responsibility for pain management.
6. Determine relevant cultural and spirituality factors affecting pain response. Pain is accepted and expressed in different ways (e.g., moaning aloud or enduring in stoic silence). Some may magnify symptoms to convince others of reality of pain, or believe that suffering in silence helps atone for past wrongdoing. Note: A person with chronic pain who identifi es him- or herself as a spiritual being may report the link to divine help as empowering him/her to use strategies for healing.
7. Note gender and age of client. There may be differences between how women and men perceive and/or respond to pain. Recent studies reveal large numbers of pediatric clients with chronic pain issues affecting academic attendance and function. While the prevalence of chronically painful conditions (e.g., arthritis) and illnesses (e.g., cancers) is common in the elderly, they may be reluctant to report pain.
8. Evaluate current and past analgesic, opioid, other drug use (including alcohol). Pr ovides clues to options to try or to avoid; identifi es need for changes in medication regimen as well as possible need for detoxifi cation program.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To determine client response to chronic pain situation:
1. Evaluate pain behavior, noting past and current pain experience, using pain rating scale or diary, and including functional effects and psychological factors. Pain behaviors can include the same ones present in acute pain (e.g., crying, grimacing, withdrawal, narrowed focus), but may also include other behaviors (e.g., dramatization of complaints, depression, drug misuse). Pain complaints may be exaggerated because of client’s perception that pain reports are not believed or because client believes caregivers are discounting reports of pain.
2. Provide comprehensive assessment of pain problem, noting its duration, who has been consulted, and what therapies (including alternative/complementary) have been used. The pathophysiology of chronic pain is multifactorial. If the condition causing the persistent pain is physiological and noncurable (e.g., terminal cancer), all diagnostics and treatments may have been exhausted, and pain management becomes the primary goal. If pain is present without a clear etiology or continues unabated, complex rehabilitation techniques may be required.
3. Note lifestyle effects of pain. Major effects of chronic pain on the client’s life can include depressed mood, fatigue, weight loss or gain, sleep disturbances, reduced activity and libido, excessive use of drugs and alcohol, dependent behavior, and disability seemingly out of proportion to impairment.
4. Assess degree of personal maladjustment of the client such as isolationism, anger, irritability, loss of work time or employment, and school absenteeism. Chronic pain reduces client’s coping abilities and psychological well-being, often resulting in problems with relationships and life functioning.
5. Determine issues of secondary gain for the client/signifi cant other (SO)(s) (e.g., financial or insurance compensation pending, legal or marital or family concern, school or work issues), which may be present if there is marked discrepancy between claimed distress and objective fi ndings or there is a lack of cooperation during evaluation and incomplying with prescribed treatment.
6. Note codependent components, enabling behaviors of caregivers/family members that support continuation of the status quo and may interfere with progress in pain management or resolution of situation.
7. Note availability and use of personal and community resources. Client/SO may need many things (e.g., equipment, fi nancial resources, vocational training, respite services, or placement in rehabilitation facility) in order tomanage painful conditions and/or concerns or diffi culties associated with condition.
8. Make home visit when indicated, observing such factors as client’s safety, equipment, adequate lighting, or family interactions to note impact of home environment on the client and to determine changes that might be useful in improving client’s life (e.g., grab bars in bathrooms and hallways, wider doors, ramps, assistance with activities of daily living [ADLs], housekeeping, yard work).
9. Acknowledge and assess pain matter-of-factly, avoiding undue expressions of concern, as well as expressions ofdisbelief about client’s suffering. Conveying an attitude of empathic understanding of client’s disabling distress can have a benefi cial impact on client’s perception of health.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To assist client to deal with pain: 
1. Encourage participation in multidisciplinary pain management plan. Comprehensive team may include physical medicine specialist; physical, occupational, recreational, and vocational therapists; and emotional or behavioral therapists to address complex issues of unresolved painissues, to set goals for pain relief, and to develop an individualized treatment and evaluation plan.
2. Review client pain management goals and expectations versus reality. Pain may not be completely resolved but may be signifi cantly lessened to “acceptable level” or managed to the degree that client can participate in desired orneeded life activities.
3. Discuss the physiological dynamics of tension and anxietyand how this affects pain. 
4. Administer or encourage client use of analgesics, as indicated. Medications may be available in pills, liquids, or suckers to take by mouth, and in injection, skin patch, and suppository forms. Different medications or combinations of drugs may be used to manage persistent pain so that client may fi nd relief and increase level of function. Note: Studies support that people with intense pain can take very high doses of opioids without experiencing side effects.
5. Provide consistent and suffi cient medication for pain relief, tailored to the individual, especially in one who tends to be undermedicated (e.g., elderly, cognitively impaired, person with lifelong pain, those with terminal cancer). Medications may need to be scheduled around the clock, doses titrated up or down, and dose maximized to optimize pain relief while managing side effects.
6. Recommend or employ nonpharmacological interventions, methods of pain control (e.g., heat or cold applications, progressive muscle relaxation, biofeedback, deep breathing, meditation, visualization or guided imagery, posturecorrection and muscle strengthening exercises, water therapy, electrical stimulation, massage, acupuncture, Therapeutic Touch [TT]) to obtain comfort, improve healing, and decrease dependency on analgesics.
7. Address medication misuse with client/SO and refer for appropriate counseling or interventions when addiction is known or suspected to be interfering with client’s well-being. Addicts may misrepresent their pain levels and their activities in order to obtain pain medications or progressively higher doses of medications, and they require specialized evaluation and interventions.
8. Discuss pain management goals and review client expectations versus reality; it may be that while pain cannot be completely resolved, it can be signifi cantly reduced or managed to the degree that client can participate in desired or needed life activities, improving quality of life.
9. Assist family in developing a program of coping strategies (e.g., staying active even when modifi ed activities are required, living a healthy lifestyle). Positive reinforcement, encouraging client to use own control can aid in focusing energies on more productive activities.
10. Encourage limiting attention to pain behaviors, when appropriate (e.g., discussing pain for only a specified time; or acknowledging “I’m sorry your pain returned today, but you need to go to school”; or actively practicing relaxation or coping skills). Reduces focus on pain, especially if client is highly dependent on pain for secondary gain issues or is addicted to medications.
11.  Encourage client to use positive affi rmations: “I am healing.” “I am relaxed.” “I love this life.” Have client be aware of internal-external dialogue. Say “cancel” when negative thoughts develop. Negative thinking can exacerbate feelings of hopelessness, and replacing those thoughts with positive ones can be helpful to pain management.
12. Encourage right-brain stimulation with activities such as love, laughter, and music. These actions can release endorphins, enhancing sense of well-being.
13. Encourage use of subliminal tapes to bypass logical part of the brain by reinforcing: “I am becoming a more relaxed person.” “It is all right for me to relax.”
14. Use tranquilizers, narcotics, and analgesics sparingly. These drugs are physically and psychologically addicting and promote sleep disturbances, especially interference with deep rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Client may need to be detoxifi ed if many medications are currently used.
15. Be alert to changes in pain characteristics that may indicate a new physical problem or developing complication.

[Nursing Priority No.4]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide anticipatory guidance to client with condition in which pain is common and educate about when, where, and how to seek intervention or treatments.
2. Assist client and SO(s) to learn how to heal by developing sense of internal control, by being responsible for own treatment, and by obtaining the information and tools to accomplish this. 
3. Discuss potential for developmental delays in child with chronic pain. Identify current level of function and review appropriate expectations for individual child.
4. Instruct client/SO in medication administration, including use of patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pumps, as indicated. Review safe use of analgesics, including side effects requiring home management (e.g., constipation) or adverse effects requiring medical intervention (e.g., possible drug reactions). Appropriate instruction in home management increases the accuracy and safety of medication administration.
5. Encourage and assist family member/SO(s) to learn homecare interventions. Massage and other nonpharmacological pain management techniques benefi t the client through reduction of pain level and sense that client is not alone/has support of SO.
6. Incorporate desired folk healthcare practices and beliefs into regimen whenever possible. Has been shown to increase compliance with pain management treatment plan.
7. Identify and discuss potential hazards of unproved or nonmedical therapies or remedies. 
8. Assist client and SO(s) to learn how to heal by developing sense of internal control, by being responsible for own treatment, and by obtaining the information and tools to accomplish this.
9. Recommend that client and SO(s) take time for themselves. Provides opportunity to reenergize and refocus on living/ tasks at hand.
10. Address client’s preferences and wishes for incurable pain or end-of-life pain management via advance directives in order to assist family/SO in attending to client’s needs.
11. Identify community support groups and resources to meet individual needs (e.g., yard care, home maintenance, transportation). Proper use of resources may reduce negative pattern of “overdoing” heavy activities and then spending several days in bed recuperating.
12. Refer for counseling (e.g., individual, family, marital therapy, parent effectiveness classes) as needed. Presence of chronic pain affects all relationships and family dynamics.
13. Refer to NDs compromised family Coping, ineffective Coping.

=====