::Chronic Low Self-Esteem And Risk For Chronic Low Self-Esteem::

::Definition::
 - Chronic Low Self-Esteem: Negative evaluation and/or feelings about one’s own capabilities lasting at least three months. 
 - Risk For Chronic Low Self-Esteem: Susceptible to long-standing negative self-evaluating/feelings about self or self-capabilities, which may compromise health. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Note age and developmental level of client and circumstances surrounding current situation. Younger people may not have learned skills to deal with negative occurrences and/or rejection from others.
2. Elicit client’s perceptions of current situation. 
3. Determine factors of low self-esteem related to current situation (e.g., family crises, physical disfi gurement, social isolation). Current crises may exacerbate long-standing feelings and perception of self-evaluation as not being worthwhile
4. Assess content of negative self-talk. Note client’s perceptions of how others view him or her. Constant repetition of negative words and thoughts reinforces idea that individual is worthless and belief that others view him or her in a negative manner.
5. Observe nonverbal behavior (e.g., nervous movements, lack of eye contact) and how it relates to verbal statements. Incongruence between verbal and nonverbal needs to be clarifi ed to be sure perceived meaning of communication is accurate.
6. Determine availability and quality of family/signifi cant other (SO) support. The development of a positive sense of self depends on how the person relates to members of the family, as they are growing up and in the current situation.
7. Identify family dynamics—present and past—and cultural influences. How family members interact affects an individual’s development and sense of self-esteem. Whether family members are negative and nonsupportive, or positive and supportive, affects the needs of the client at this time.
8. Be alert to client’s concept of self in relation to cultural/ religious ideal(s). Composition and structure of nuclear family infl uence individual’s sense of who he or she is in relation to others in the family and in society.
9. Note willingness to seek assistance and motivation for change. Determines client’s degree of participation in adhering to therapeutic regimen.
10. Note nonverbal behavior (e.g., nervous movements, lack of eye contact). Incongruencies between verbal/nonverbal communication require clarifi cation.
11. Determine degree of participation and cooperation with therapeutic regimen. Maintaining scheduled medications (e.g., antidepressants, antipsychotics) and other aspects of the plan of care requires ongoing evaluation and possible changes in regimen.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To promote client sense of self-esteem in dealing with current situation or prepare for changes:
1.  Develop therapeutic relationship. Be attentive, validate client’s communication, provide encouragement for efforts, maintain open communication, use skills of active-listening and I-messages. Promotes trusting situation in which client is free to be open and honest with self and therapist.
2. Address presenting medical/safety issues. Client’s selfesteem may be affected by physical changes of current medical conditions. Changes in body (e.g., weight loss or gain, amputation) will affect how client sees self as a person. Attitude may contribute to depression and lack of attention to personal safety, requiring evaluation and assistance.
3. Accept client’s perceptions or view of situation. Avoid threatening existing self-esteem. 
4. Be aware that people are not designed to be rational. They must seek information—choosing to learn and to think rather than merely accepting or reacting—in order to have respect for self, facts, and honesty and to develop positive self-esteem.
5. Discuss client perceptions of self related to what is happening; confront misconceptions and negative self-talk. Address distortions in thinking, such as self-referencing (belief that others are focusing on individual’s weaknesses/limitations), fi ltering (focusing on negative and ignoring positive), catastrophizing (expecting the worst outcomes). Addressing these issues openly provides opportunity for change.
6. Emphasize need to avoid comparing self with others. Encourage client to focus on aspects of self that can be valued. Changing negative thinking can be effective in developing positive self-talk to enhance self-esteem.
7. Have client review past successes and strengths. May help client see that he or she can develop an internal locus of control (a belief that one’s successes and failures are the result of one’s efforts).
8. Use positive I-messages rather than praise. Praise may be heard as manipulative and insincere and be rejected. Use of positive I-messages communicates a feeling that is genuine and allows client to feel good about himself or herself, developing internal sense of self-esteem.
9. Discuss what a given behavior does for client (positive intention). What options are available to the client/SO(s)? Helping client begin to look at what actions might be taken to achieve the same rewards in a more positive way can provide a realistic and accurate self-appraisal, enhancing sense of competence and self-worth.
10. Assist client to deal with sense of powerlessness. Preventing undesirable behavior prevents feelings of worthlessness. Use of empathy helps caregiver to understand client’s feelings better. (Refer to ND Powerlessness.)
11. Set limits on aggressive or problem behaviors such as acting out, suicide preoccupation, or rumination. Put self in client’s place (empathy, not sympathy). These negative behaviors diminish sense of self-concept.
12. Give reinforcement for progress noted. Positive words of encouragement promote continuation of efforts, supporting development of coping behaviors.
13. Encourage client to progress at own rate. Adaptation to a change in self-concept depends on its signifi cance to individual, disruption to lifestyle, and length of illness/ debilitation.
14.  Assist client to recognize and cope with events, alterations, and sense of loss of control by incorporating changes accurately into self-concept.
15.  Involve in activities or exercise program, promote socialization. Enhances sense of well-being/can help energize client.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Discuss inaccuracies in self-perception with client/SO(s). Enables client and SOs to begin to look at misperceptions and accept reality, and look at options for change to improve sense of self-worth.
2. Model behaviors being taught, involving client in goal-setting and decision-making. Facilitates client’s developing trust in own unique strengths.
3. Prepare client for events/changes that are expected, when possible to provide opportunity for client to prepare self, or reduce negative reactions associated with the unknown.
4. Provide structure in daily routine/care activities.
5. Emphasize importance of grooming and personal hygiene. Assist in developing skills as indicated (e.g., makeup classes, dressing for success). People feel better about themselves when they present a positive outer appearance.
6. Assist client to identify goals that are personally achievable. Increases likelihood of success and commitment to change.
7. Provide positive feedback for verbal and behavioral indications of improved self-view
8. Refer to vocational or employment counselor, educational resources, as appropriate. Assists with development of social or vocational skills, enhancing sense of self-concept and inner locus of control.
9. Encourage participation in class, activities, or hobbies that client enjoys or would like to experience. Meaningful accomplishment, assuming self-responsibility, and participating in new activities engenders one’s sense of competence and self-worth.
10. Reinforce that this therapy is a brief encounter in overall life of the client/SO(s), with continued work and ongoing support being necessary to sustain behavior changes and personal growth.
11. Refer to classes (e.g., assertiveness training, positive selfimage, communication skills) to assist with learning new skills to promote self-esteem.
12. Refer to counseling, therapy, mental health, or special needs support groups, as indicated.
=====

