::Death Anxiety::

::Definition::
: Vague uneasy feeling of discomfort or dread generated by perceptions of a real or imagined threat to one’s 
existence. 

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  Nursing Priority No. 1. 
1. To assess causative/contributing factors: 
2. Determine how client sees self in usual lifestyle role functioning and perception and meaning of anticipated loss to him or her and signifi cant other(s) (SO[s]). 
3. Ascertain current knowledge of situation to identify misconceptions, lack of information, and other pertinent issues.
4. Determine the client’s role in the family constellation. Observe patterns of communication in family and response of family/SO to client’s situation and concerns. In addition to identifying areas of need/concern, this also reveals strengths useful in addressing the concerns.
5. Assess the impact of client reports of subjective experiences 
and past experience with death (or exposure to death), for 
example, witnessed violent death, viewed body in casket as 
a child, and so on. 
6. Identify cultural factors/expectations and impact on current situation and feelings. These factors affect client attitude toward events and impending loss. Many cultures prefer to keep the client at home instead of in a long-term care facility or hospital. In the United States, hospice is often used to provide palliative care and comfort during the client’s fi nal days in any setting.
7. Note client’s age, physical and mental condition, and complexity of therapeutic regimen. May affect ability to handle current situation.
8. Determine the ability to manage own self-care, end-of-life and other affairs, and awareness/use of available resources. 
9. Observe behavior indicative of the level of anxiety present (mild to panic) as it affects the client’s/SO(s)’ ability to process information and participate in activities.
10. Identify coping skills currently used and how effective they are. Be aware of defense mechanisms being used by the client. 
11. Note the use of alcohol or other drugs of abuse, reports of insomnia, excessive sleeping, and avoidance of interactions with others, which may be behavioral indicators of use of withdrawal to deal with problems.
12. Note the client’s religious and spiritual orientation and involvement in religious activities; note also the presence of confl icts regarding spiritual beliefs. 
13. Listen to client’s/SOs’ reports/expressions of anger and concern, alienation from God, or belief that impending death is a punishment for wrongdoing. 
14. Determine sense of futility; feelings of hopelessness or helplessness; lack of motivation to help self. These may indicate the presence of depression and need for intervention.
15. Active-listen comments regarding sense of isolation. 
16. Listen for expressions of inability to fi nd meaning in life or suicidal ideation. Signs of depression indicate need for referral to therapist/psychiatrist and possible pharmacological treatment to help client deal with terminal illness or situation
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  Nursing Priority No. 2. 
1. To assist client to deal with situation: 
2. Provide an open and trusting relationship. 
3. Use therapeutic communication skills of active-listening, silence, and acknowledgment. Respect the client’s desire or request not to talk. Provide hope within parameters of the individual situation. 
4. Encourage expressions of feelings (anger, fear, sadness, etc.). Acknowledge anxiety/fear. Do not deny or reassure client that everything will be all right. Be honest when answering questions/providing information. This enhances trust and therapeutic relationship.
5. Provide information about the normalcy of feelings and individual grief reaction. 
6. Make time for nonjudgmental discussion of philosophical issues and questions about the spiritual impact of the illness/situation. 
7. Review life experiences of loss and previous use of coping skills, noting the client’s strengths and successes. Provides a starting point to plan care and assists client to acknowledge reality and deal more effectively with what is happening.
8. Provide a calm, peaceful setting and privacy as appropriate. Thispromotes relaxation and the ability to deal with a situation.
9. Note client’s religious or spiritual orientation, involvement in religious or church activities, and presence of confl icts regarding spiritual beliefs. May benefi t from referral to appropriate resource to help client resolve issues, if desired.
10. Assist the client to engage in spiritual growth activities, if desired, and experience prayer/meditation and forgiveness to heal past hurts. Provide information that anger with God is a normal part of the grieving process. This reduces feelings of guilt/confl ict, allowing the client to move forward toward resolution.
11. Refer to therapists, spiritual advisors, and counselors to facilitate grief work.
12. Refer to community agencies/resources to assist client/SO(s) for planning for eventualities (legal issues, funeral plans, etc.).
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To promote independence: 
1. Support the client’s efforts to develop realistic steps to put plans into action. 
2. Direct the client’s thoughts beyond the present state to enjoyment of each day and the future when appropriate. Being in the moment can help client enjoy this time rather than dwelling on what is ahead.
3. Provide opportunities for the client to make simple decisions. This enhances sense of control.
4. Develop an individual plan using the client’s locus of control to assist the client/family through the process.
5. Treat expressed decisions and desires with respect and convey to others as appropriate. 
6. Assist with completion of Advance Directives, CPR instructions, and durable medical power of attorney. 
7. Refer to palliative, hospice, or end-of-life care resources, 
as appropriate. Provides support and assistance to client and SO/family through potentially complex and diffi cult process
=========

