::Decisional Conflict::

::Definition::
Uncertainty about course of action to be taken 
when choice among competing actions involves risk, loss, or 
challenge to values and beliefs

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Determine usual ability to manage own affairs. Clarify who has legal right to intervene on behalf of a child, elder, or impaired individual (e.g., parent/spouse, other relative, designee for durable medical power of attorney, or court-appointed guardian/advocate). Family disruption and confl icts can complicate decision process.
2. Note expressions of indecision, dependence on others, availability/involvement of support persons (e.g., client may have lack of/confl icting advice). Ascertain dependency of other(s) on client and/or issues of codependency. Infl uence of others may lead client to make decision that is not what is really wanted or in his or her best interest.
3. Active-listen/identify reason for indecisiveness. This helps the client to clarify the problem and work toward a solution.
4. Identify cultural values and beliefs or moral obligations and principles that may be creating confl ict for client and complicating decision-making process. These issues must be addressed before client can be at peace with the decision that is made.
5. Determine the effectiveness of the current problem-solving techniques. 
6. Note the presence/intensity of physical signs of anxiety (e.g., increased heart rate and muscle tension). 
7. Listen for expressions of the client’s inability to fi nd meaning in life/reason for living, feelings of futility, or alienation from God and others around the client. May need to talk about reasons for feelings of alienation to resolve concerns and may engage in questioning about own values. (Refer to ND Spiritual Distress, as indicated.) 
8. Review information the client has about the healthcare decision. Accurate and clearly understood information about the situation will help the client make the best decision for self.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to develop/effectively use problem-solving skills: 
1. Promote a safe and hopeful environment, as needed, while the client regains inner control. 
2. Encourage verbalization of confl icts or concerns. 
3. Accept verbal expressions of anger or guilt, setting limits on maladaptive behavior. Verbalization of feelings enables client to sift through feelings and begin to deal with situation.
4. Clarify and prioritize individual goals, noting where the subject of the “confl ict” falls on this scale. Choices may have risky, uncertain outcomes; may refl ect a need to make value judgments; or may generate regret over having to reject positive choice and accept negative consequences.
5. Identify strengths and presence of positive coping skills (e.g., use of relaxation technique or willingness to express feelings). Helpful for developing solutions to current situation.
6. Identify positive aspects of this experience and assist the client to view it as a learning opportunity to develop new and creative solutions.
7. Correct misperceptions the client may have and provide factual information. This provides for better decision-making.
8. Provide opportunities for the client to make simple decisions regarding self-care and other daily activities. Accept the choice not to do so. Advance complexity of choices, as tolerated. 
9. Encourage the child to make developmentally appropriate decisions concerning own care. This fosters the child’s sense of self-worth and enhances the child’s ability to learn and exercise coping skills.
10. Discuss time considerations, setting a time line for small steps and considering consequences related to not making/postponing specifi c decisions to facilitate resolution of confl ict.
11. Have the client list some alternatives to the present situation or decisions, using a brainstorming process. Include the family in this activity as indicated (e.g., placement of parent in a long-term care facility, use of intervention process with addicted member). (Refer to NDs interrupted Family Processes; dysfunctional Family Processes; compromised family Coping; Moral Distress.) 
12. Practice the use of the problem-solving process with the current situation/decision. 
13. Discuss or clarify cultural or spiritual concerns, accepting the client’s values in a nonjudgmental manner.

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Promote opportunities for using confl ict-resolution skills, identifying steps as the client does each one. 
2. Provide positive feedback for efforts and progress noted. This promotes a continuation of efforts.
3. Encourage involvement of family/SO(s), as desired/available, to provide support for the client.
4. Support the client for decisions made, especially if consequences are unexpected and/or diffi cult to cope with. 
5. Encourage attendance at stress reduction or assertiveness classes. 
6. Refer to other resources, as necessary (e.g., clergy, psychiatric clinical nurse specialist/psychiatrist, family/maritaltherapist, or addiction support groups).
=========