::Disorganized Infant Behavior/risk For Disorganized Behavior::

::Definition::


::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess causative/contributing or risk factors: 
1.Determine the infant's chronological and developmental age; 
note the length of gestation. 
2. Observe for cues suggesting the presence of situations that 
may result in pain/discomfort.
3. Determine the adequacy of physiological support. 
4. Evaluate level and appropriateness of environmental stimuli. 
• Ascertain the parents' understanding of infant's needs and 
abilities. 
5. Listen to the parents' concerns about their capabilities to 
meet infant's needs. 
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist parents in providing coregulation to the infant: 
6. Provide a calm, nurturing physical and emotional environment. 
7. Encourage parents to hold the infant, including skin-to-skin 
contact, using kangaroo care (KC) as appropriate. Research 
suggests KC may have a positive effect on infant development by enhancing neurophysiological organization, as 
well as an indirect effect by improving parental mood, 
perceptions, and interactive behavior.
8. Model gentle handling of baby and appropriate responses to 
infant behavior. Provides cues to the parent.
9. Support and encourage parents to be with the infant and 
participate actively in all aspects of care. The situation may 
be overwhelming, and support may enhance coping and 
strengthen attachment.
10. Encourage parents to refrain from social interaction during 
feedings, as appropriate. The infant may have diffi culty/
lack necessary energy to manage feeding and social 
stimulation simultaneously.
11. Provide positive feedback for progressive parental involvement in the caregiving process. Transfer of care from staff 
to parents progresses along a continuum as parents' confidence level increases and they are able to take on more 
complex care activities.
12. Discuss infant growth and development, pointing out current 
status and progressive expectations, as appropriate. Augments parents' knowledge of coregulation.
13. Incorporate the parents' observations and suggestions into 
the plan of care. This demonstrates valuing of parents' 
input and encourages continued involvement. 

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To deliver care within the infant
's stress threshold: 
1. Provide a consistent caregiver. Facilitates recognition of 
infant cues or changes in behavior.
2. Identify the infant's individual self-regulatory behaviors (e.g., 
sucking, mouthing, grasp, hand-to-mouth, face behaviors, foot 
clasp, brace, limb fl exion, trunk tuck, or boundary seeking).
3. Support hands to mouth and face; offer pacifi er or nonnutritive sucking at the breast with gavage feedings. Provides 
opportunities for the infant to suck.
4. Avoid aversive oral stimulation, such as routine oral suctioning; suction endotracheal tube only when clinically indicated. 
5. Use Oxyhood large enough to cover the infant's chest so arms 
will be inside the hood. This allows for hand-to-mouth 
activities during this therapy.
6. Provide opportunities for the infant to grasp. 
7. Provide boundaries and/or containment during all activities. 
Use swaddling, nesting, bunting, and caregiver's hands as 
indicated. 
8. Allow adequate time and opportunities to hold the infant. Handle the infant very gently, move the infant smoothly and slowly, 
and keep it contained, avoiding sudden or abrupt movements. 
9. Maintain normal alignment, position the infant with limbs 
softly fl exed and with shoulders and hips adducted slightly. 
Use appropriate-sized diapers. 
10. Evaluate the chest for adequate expansion, placing rolls 
under the trunk if a prone position is indicated. 
11. Avoid restraints, including at IV sites. If IV board is necessary, secure to limb positioned in normal alignment. 
12. Provide a sheepskin, egg-crate mattress, water bed, and/or 
gel pillow or mattress for the infant who does not tolerate 
frequent position changes. This minimizes tissue pressure 
and lessens the risk of tissue injury.
13. Assess color, respirations, activity, and invasive lines visually to avoid disturbing the infant. Assess with “hands on” 
every 4 hr as indicated and prn. This allows for undisturbed 
rest and quiet periods.
14. Schedule care activities to allow time for rest and organization of sleep and wake states to maximize tolerance of the 
infant. Defer routine care to when the infant is in quiet sleep. 
15. Provide care with the baby in side-lying position. Begin by 
talking softly to the baby, then place hands in a containing 
hold on the baby, which allows baby to prepare. Proceed 
with least-invasive manipulations fi rst. 
16. Respond promptly to infant's agitation or restlessness. 
Provide a “time out” when the infant shows early cues of 
overstimulation. Comfort and support the infant after stressful interventions. 
17. Remain at the infant's bedside for several minutes after procedures and caregiving to monitor the infant's response 
and provide necessary support.
18. Administer analgesics as individually appropriate.

[Nursing Priority No. 4] 
    - To modify the environment to provide appropriate stimulation:
1. Introduce stimulation as a single mode and assess individual tolerance. 
        - Light/Vision 
    -- Reduce lighting perceived by the infant; introduce diurnal lighting (and activity) when infant achieves physiological stability. (Daylight levels of 20 to 30 candles and night light levels of less than 10 candles are suggested.) Change light levels gradually to allow the infant time to adjust.
    -- Protect the infant's eyes from bright illumination during examinations and procedures, as well as from indirect sources, such as neighboring phototherapy treatments, to prevent retinal damage.
    -- Deliver phototherapy (when required) with BiliBlanket devices, if available (alleviates need for eye patches).
    -- Provide caregiver's face (preferably parent's) as visual stimulus when infant shows readiness (awake, attentive). 
    -- Evaluate/readjust placement of pictures, stuffed animals, and so on, within the infant's immediate environment. This promotes state maintenance and smooth transition by allowing the infant to look away easily when visual stimuli become stressful.
        - Sound 
    -- Identify sources of noise in the environment and eliminate/reduce them (e.g., speak in a low voice; reduce volume on alarms and telephones to quieter [but audible] levels; pad metal trash can lids; open paper packages, such as IV tubing and suction catheters slowly and at a distance from the bedside; conduct rounds or report away from bedside; place soft, thick fabric, such as blanket rolls and toys, near infant's head to absorb sound). 
    -- Keep all incubator portholes closed, closing with two hands to avoid a loud snap and associated startle response.
    -- Refrain from playing musical toys or tape players inside the incubator. 
    -- Avoid placing items on top of the incubator; if necessary to do so, pad the surface well. 
    -- Conduct regular decibel (dB) checks of interior noise level in incubator (recommended not to exceed 60 dB). 
    -- Provide auditory stimulation to console and supportinfant before and through handling or to reinforce restfulness.
        - Olfactory 
    -- Be cautious in exposing the infant to strong odors (e.g., alcohol, Betadine, perfumes), as olfactory capability of the infant is very sensitive.
    -- Place a cloth or gauze pad scented with milk near the infant's face during gavage feeding. This enhances association of milk with act of feeding and gastric fullness.
    -- Invite parents to leave near the infant a handkerchief that they have scented by wearing close to their body. This strengthens infant recognition of parents.
        - Vestibular 
    -- Move and handle the infant slowly and gently. Do not restrict spontaneous movement. 
    -- Provide vestibular stimulation to console, stabilize breathing and heart rate, or enhance growth. Use a water bed (with or without oscillation), a motorized or moving bed or cradle, or rocking in the arms of a caregiver. 
    - Gustatory 
    -- Dip pacifier in milk and offer to infant during gavage feeding for sucking and to stimulate tasting.
        - Tactile 
    -- Maintain skin integrity and monitor closely. Limit the frequency of invasive procedures. 
    -- Minimize the use of chemicals on the skin (e.g., alcohol, Betadine, solvents) and remove afterward with warm water, because skin is very sensitive/fragile.
    -- Limit the use of tape and adhesives directly on skin. Use DuoDerm under tape to prevent dermal injury.
    -- Touch the infant with a firm containing touch; avoid light stroking. Provide a sheepskin pad or soft linen. Note: Tactile experience is the primary sensory mode of the infant.
    -- Encourage frequent parental holding of the infant (including skin-to-skin). Supplement activity with extended family, staff, and volunteers.

[Nursing Priority No. 5]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Evaluate the home environment to identify appropriate modifications.
2. Identify community resources (e.g., early stimulation programs, qualifi ed childcare facilities, respite care, visiting nurse, home-care support, specialty organizations). 
3. Determine sources for equipment and therapy needs.
4. Refer to support or therapy groups, as indicated, to provide role models, facilitate adjustment to new roles/responsibilities, and enhance coping.
5. Provide contact number, as appropriate (e.g., primary nurse), to support adjustment to home setting.
6. Refer to additional NDs, such as risk for impaired Attachment; compromised/disabled or readiness for enhanced family Coping; risk for disproportionate Growth; risk for delayed Development; risk for caregiver Role Strain. 

=========