::Disturbed Personal identity And Riks For Disturbed Personal Identity::

::Definition::
 - Disturbed Personal Identity: Inability to maintain an integrated and complete perception of self.
 - Risk For Fisturbed Personal Identity: Susceptible to the inability to maintain an integrated and complete perception of self, which may compromise health.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Ascertain client’s perception of the extent of the threat to self and how client is handling the situation. Many factors can affect an individual’s self-image: illness (chronic or terminal), injuries, changes in body structure (e.g., amputation, spinal cord damage, burns), and client’s view of what has happened will affect development of plan of care and interventions to be used.
2. Determine speed of occurrence of threat. An event that has happened quickly may be more threatening (e.g., a traumatic event resulting in change in body image).
3. Ask client to defi ne own body image. Body image is the basis of personal identity; client’s perception will affect how changes are viewed, may prevent achievement of ideals and expectations, and may have a negative effect.
4. Determine whether issues of gender identity are a concern. Client may have confl icting feelings about how to deal with realization he or she is homosexual or transsexual.
5. Note age of client. An adolescent may struggle with the developmental task of personal or sexual identity, whereas an older person may have more diffi culty accepting or dealing with a threat to identity, such as progressive loss of memory.
6. Identify cultural affi liations/discontinuity. Individuals belonging to subcultures or cults tend to come into confl ict with the greater societal views, affecting one’s perception of self and perception of reality.
7. Assess availability and use of support systems. Note response of family/signifi cant other (SO)(s). During stressful situations, support is essential for client to cope with changes that are occurring. Engaging family in choosing supportive interventions will help client and family members deal with situation or illness.
8. Note withdrawn or automatic behavior, regression to earlier developmental stage, general behavioral disorganization, or display of self-mutilation behaviors in adolescent or adult; delayed development, preference for solitary play, unusual display of self-stimulation in child. Indicators of poor coping skills and need for specifi c interventions to help client develop sense of self and identity. 
9. Note signs of anxiety (e.g., reports feeling stressed out, sleep difficulties, muscle tension, overthinking, diffi culty making decision). Use of inadequate coping strategies to deal with changes affecting lifestyle may result in exacerbation of symptoms in anxious person. (Refer to ND Anxiety [specify level].)
10. Be aware of physical signs of panic state (e.g., heart palpitations, trembling, shortness of breath, chest pressure or pain). Severe anxiety state may progress to panic when concerns seem overwhelming to client. (Refer to ND Anxiety.) 
11. Discuss use of alcohol, other drugs. Individuals often use these substances to avoid painful stressors.
12. Determine distortions of reality/symptoms of mental illness. Requires more in-depth psychological counseling/medication to help client distinguish between self and non-self.


[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to manage/deal with stressors:
1. Make time to listen/active-listen client, encouraging appropriate expression of feelings, including anger and hostility. Conveys a sense of confi dence in client’s ability to identify extent of threat, how it is affecting sense of identity, and how to deal with feelings in acceptable way.
2. Discuss client’s concerns without confronting unreal ideas. Irrational beliefs may interfere with ability to manage situation and maintain reality-based perception of self.
3. Provide calm environment. Helps client to remain calm and able to discuss important issues related to the identity crisis.
4. Use crisis intervention principles as needed to restore equilibrium when possible.
5. Discuss client’s commitment to an identity. Those who have made a strong commitment to an identity tend to be more comfortable with self and happier than those who have not.
6. Assist client to develop strategies to cope with threat to identity. Helps reduce anxiety and promotes self-awareness and self-esteem.
7.  Engage client in activities to help in identifying self as an individual (e.g., use of mirror for visual feedback, tactile stimulation). 
8. Provide for simple decisions, concrete tasks, calming activities.
9. Allow client to deal with situation in small steps. May be unable to cope with larger picture when in stress overload.
10. Encourage client to develop and participate in an individualized exercise program (walking is an excellent beginning). Exercise releases endorphins, thereby reducing stress and anxiety, promoting a sense of well-being.
11. Provide concrete assistance, as needed (e.g., help with activities of daily living, preparing food).
12. Take advantage of opportunities to promote growth. Realize that client will have diffi culty learning while in a dissociative state.
13. Maintain reality orientation without confronting client’s irrational beliefs. Client may become defensive, blocking opportunity to look at other possibilities.
14. Use humor judiciously, when appropriate. While humor can lift spirits and provide a moment of levity, it is important to note the mood or receptiveness of the client before using it.
15. Discuss options for dealing with issues of gender identity. Identification of client’s concerns about role dysfunction or confl icting feelings about sexual identity will indicate need for therapies, or possible gender-change surgery.
16. Refer to NDs disturbed Body Image; Self-Esteem [specify]; Spiritual Distress. 


[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide accurate information about threat to and potential consequences for individual. Helps client to make positive decisions for future.
2. Discuss potential changes in lifestyle that may occur with major diagnosis/accident. Planning for these possibilities can enhance self-confidence and allow client to move forward with life.
3. Refer to appropriate support groups. Sharing concerns with others in group settings may help client to be realistic regarding concerns about effects of anticipated changes/ life challenges.
4. Explore community resources as appropriate. Additional assistance such as day programs, individual/family counseling, drug/alcohol cessation programs can strengthen client’s coping abilities and sense of control.

=====