::Disturbed Body Image::

::Definition::
Confusion in [and/or dissatisfaction with] mental picture of one’s physical self. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
-To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Discuss pathophysiology present and/or situation affecting the individual and refer to additional NDs as appropriate. For example, when alteration in body image is related to neurological deficit (e.g., cerebrovascular accident—CVA), refer to ND Unilateral Neglect; in the presence of severe, ongoing pain, refer to ND chronic Pain; or in loss of sexual desire/ability, refer to ND Sexual Dysfunction. 
2. Determine whether the condition is permanent with no expectation for resolution (may be associated with other NDs, such as Self-Esteem [specify] or risk for impaired Attachment, when child is affected). There is always something that can be done to enhance acceptance, and it is important to hold out the possibility of living a good life with the disability.
3. Assess mental and physical influence of illness or condition on the client’s emotional state (e.g., diseases of the endocrine system or use of steroid therapy). Some diseases or conditions can have a profound effect on one’s emotions and need to be considered in the evaluation and treatment of the individual’s behavior and reaction to the current situation.
4. Evaluate the level of the client’s knowledge of and anxiety related to the situation. Observe emotional changes, which may indicate acceptance or nonacceptance of the situation.
5. Recognize behavior indicative of overconcern with the body and its processes. May interfere with ability to engage in therapy and indicate need to provide interventions to deal with concern before beginning therapy.
6. Have the client describe self, noting what is positive and what is negative. Be aware of how the client believes others see self. Identifi es self-image and whether there is a discrepancy between own view, how client’s view is affected by social media, or how client believes others see him or her, which may have an effect on how client perceives changes that have occurred.
7. Discuss the meaning of loss/change to the client. A small (seemingly trivial) loss may have a big impact (e.g., the use of a urinary catheter or enema for continence). A change in function (e.g., immobility in elderly) may be more difficult for some to deal with than a change in appearance. The change could be devastating (e.g., permanent facial scarring of child).
8. Use developmentally appropriate communication techniques 
9. for determining exact expression of body image in a child (e.g., puppet play or constructive dialogue for toddler). 
10. Developmental capacity must guide interaction to gain accurate information.
11. Note signs of grieving or indicators of severe or prolonged depression to evaluate need for counseling and/or medications.
12. Determine ethnic background and cultural and religious perceptions or considerations. Understanding how these factors affect the individual in this situation and how they may influence how individual deals with what has happened is necessary to develop appropriate intervention.
13. Identify social aspects of illness or condition (e.g., sexually transmitted diseases, sterility, or chronic conditions), may affect how client views self and functions in social settings as well as how others view the client.
14. Observe interaction of client with signifi cant other (SOs). Distortions in body image may be unconsciously reinforced by family members, and/or secondary gain issues may interfere with progress.

[Nursing Priority No. 2] 
-To determine coping abilities and skills: 
1. Assess the client’s current level of adaptation and progress. 
2. Listen to the client’s comments and responses to the situation. Different situations are upsetting to different people, depending on individual coping skills and past experiences.
3. Note withdrawn behavior and the use of denial. This may be a normal response to a situation or may be indicative of mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia). (Refer to ND ineffective Denial.) 
4. Note dependence on prescription medications or use of addictive substances, such as alcohol or other drugs, which may refl ect dysfunctional coping.
5. Identify previously used coping strategies and effectiveness. 
6. Determine individual/family/community resources available to the client. 

[Nursing Priority No. 4]
-To assist client and SO(s) to deal with/accept issues of self-concept related to body image: 
1. Establish a therapeutic nurse-client relationship, conveying an attitude of caring and developing a sense of trust. 
2. Visit the client frequently and acknowledge the individual as someone who is worthwhile. This provides opportunities for listening to concerns and questions.
3. Assist in correcting underlying problems to promote optimal healing and adaptation.
4. Provide assistance with self-care needs as necessary, while promoting individual abilities and independence. Client may need support to achieve the goal of independence and positive return to managing own life.
5. Work with the client’s self-concept, avoiding moral judgments regarding client’s efforts or progress (e.g., “You should be progressing faster”; “You’re weak or not trying hard enough”). Positive reinforcement encourages the client to continue efforts and strive for improvement.
6. Discuss concerns about fear of mutilation, prognosis, or rejection when the client is facing surgery or a potentially poor outcome of procedure/illness, to address realities and provide emotional support.
7. Acknowledge and accept feelings of dependency, grief, and hostility. 
8. Encourage verbalization of and role-play anticipated confl icts to enhance the handling of potential situations.
9. Encourage the client and SO(s) to communicate feelings to each other. 
10. Assume all individuals are sensitive to changes in appearance, but avoid stereotyping. Not all individuals react to body changes in the same way, and it is important to determine how this person is reacting to changes.
11. Alert the staff to monitor their own facial expressions and other nonverbal behaviors, because they need to convey acceptance and not revulsion when the client’s appearance is affected.
12. Encourage family members to treat the client normally and not as an invalid. 
13. Encourage the client to look at/touch affected body part to begin to incorporate changes into body image.
13. Allow the client to use denial without participating (e.g., client may at fi rst refuse to look at a colostomy; the nurse says, “I am going to change your colostomy now” and proceeds with the task). This provides the individual with time to adapt to the situation.
14. Set limits on maladaptive behavior and assist the client to identify positive behaviors. Self-esteem will be damaged if client is allowed to continue behaviors that are destructive or not helpful, and adaptation to new image will be delayed.
15. Provide accurate information as desired/requested. Reinforce previously given information. 
16. Discuss the availability of prosthetics, reconstructive surgery, and physical/occupational therapy or other referrals as dictated by the individual situation. Provides hope that situation is not impossible and the future does not look so bleak.
17. Help the client select and use clothing or makeup to minimize body changes and enhance appearance.
18. Discuss the reasons for infectious isolation and treatment procedures when used and make time to sit down and talk/listen to the client while in the room to decrease the sense of isolation/loneliness.

[Nursing Priority No. 4] 
-To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Begin counseling/other therapies (e.g., biofeedback or relaxation) as soon as possible to provide early/ongoing sources of support.
2. Provide information at the client’s level of acceptance and in small segments to allow easier assimilation. Clarify misconceptions. Reinforce explanations given by other health team members. 
3. Include the client in the decision-making process and problem-solving activities. 
4. Assist the client in incorporating the therapeutic regimen into activities of daily living (e.g., including specifi c exercises and housework activities). Promotes continuation of a program by helping client see that progress can be made within own daily activities.
5. Identify/plan for alterations to home and work environment/activities to accommodate individual needs and support independence.
6. Assist the client in learning strategies for dealing with feelings and venting emotions. 
7. Offer positive reinforcement for efforts made (e.g., wearing makeup or using a prosthetic device). 
8.  Refer to appropriate support groups. 

======