::Dysfunctional Family Processes::

::Definition::
: Family functioning that fails to support the well-being of its members

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess contributing factors/underlying problem(s): 
1. Assess the current level of functioning of family members. Information necessary for planning care determines areas for focus and potential for change.
2. Ascertain the family’s understanding of the current situation; note the results of previous involvement in treatment, where indicated. Knowing what has brought about the current situation will determine a starting place for this treatment plan.
3. Review family history, explore roles of family members and circumstances involving family communication patterns, violence, or substance use. Although one member may be identifi ed as the client, all of the family members are participants in the problem and need to be involved in the solution.
4. Determine history of accidents or violent behaviors within family and safety issues. Identifies family at risk and degree of concern or disregard of individual members to determine course of action to prevent further violence.
5. Discuss current and past methods of coping. This may help to identify methods that would be useful in the current situation.
6. Determine extent and understanding of enabling behaviors being evidenced by family members. 
7. Identify sabotage behaviors of family members. Eventhough family member(s) may verbalize a desire for the individual to be healthy (or substance free), the reality of interactive dynamics is that they may unconsciously not want the individual to recover because this would affect the role(s) of the family member(s) in the relationship. 
8. Note presence and extent of behaviors of family, client, and self that might be “too helpful,” such as frequent requests for help,excuses for not following through on agreed-on behaviors, feelings of anger or irritation with others. Enabling behaviors can complicate acceptance and resolution of problem.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist family to change destructive behaviors: 
1. Obtain mutual agreement on behaviors and responsibilities for nurse and client. This maximizes understanding of what is expected of each individual.
2. Confront and examine denial and sabotage behaviors used by family members. This helps individuals recognize and move beyond blocks to recovery.
3. Discuss use of anger, rationalization, and/or projection and ways in which these interfere with problem resolution. 
4. Encourage the family to deal with anger to prevent escalation to violence. Problem-solve concerns. 
5. Determine family strengths, areas for growth, and individual/family successes. Family members may not realize they have strengths; as they identify these areas, they can choose to learn and develop new strategies for a more effective family structure.
6. Remain nonjudgmental in approach to family members and to member who uses alcohol/drugs. 
7. Provide information regarding the effects of addiction on mood/personality of the involved person. This helps family members understand and cope with negative behaviors without being judgmental or reacting angrily.
8. Distinguish between destructive aspects of enabling behavior and genuine motivation to aid the user. 
9. Identify use of manipulative behaviors and discuss ways to avoid or prevent these situations. Manipulation has the goal of controlling others; when family members accept self-responsibility and commit to stop using it, new healthy behaviors will ensue.

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Provide factual information to the client/family about the effects of addictive behaviors on the family and what to expect after discharge. 
2. Provide information about enabling behavior, an addictive disease characteristic for both user and nonuser who are codependent.
3. Discuss the importance of restructuring life activities, work/leisure relationships. Previous lifestyle/relationships supported substance use, requiring change to prevent relapse.
4. Encourage the family to refocus celebrations excluding alcohol/other drug use where indicated to reduce risk of relapse.
5. Provide support for family members; encourage participation in group work. Involvement in a group provides information about how others are dealing with problems, provides role models, and gives the individual an opportunity to practice new healthy skills.
6. Encourage involvement with, and refer to, self-help groups (e.g., Al-Anon, Alateen, Narcotics Anonymous, or family therapy groups). Regular attendance at a group can provide support; help client see how others are dealing with similar problems; and learn new skills, such as problem solving, for handling family disagreements.
7. Provide bibliotherapy as appropriate. 
8. In addition, refer to NDs interrupted Family Processes; compromised/disabled family Coping, as appropriate. 
=========