::Grieving::

::Definition::
A normal complex process that includes emotional, physical, spiritual, social, and intellectual responses and behaviors by which individuals, families, and communities incorporate an actual, anticipated, or perceived loss into their daily lives.

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To identify causative/contributing factors: 
1. Determine circumstances of current situation (e.g., sudden death, prolonged fatal illness, or loved one kept alive by extreme medical interventions). Grief can be anticipatory (e.g., mourning the loss of a loved one’s former self before actual death) or actual. Both types of grief can provoke a wide range of intense and often confl icting feelings. Grief also follows losses other than death (e.g., traumatic loss of a limb, loss of home by a tornado, loss of known self due to brain injury).
2. Evaluate the client’s perception of anticipated or actual loss and meaning to him or her: "What are your concerns?" "What are your fears?" "What is your greatest fear?" "How do you see this affecting you or your lifestyle?" 
3. Identify cultural or religious beliefs that may impact the sense of loss. 
4. Ascertain the response of the family/signifi cant other(s) (SO[s]) to the client’s situation and concerns. 
5. Determine significance of the loss to community (e.g., school bus accident with loss of life, major tornado damage to infrastructure, or fi nancial failure of major employer). 

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To determine current response: 
1. Note emotional responses, such as withdrawal, angry behavior, and crying. 
2. Observe the client’s body language and check out meaning with the client. Note congruency with verbalizations. 
3. Note cultural and religious expectations that may dictate a client’s responses to assess appropriateness of client’s reaction to the situation.
4. Identify problems with eating, activity level, sexual desire, and role performance (e.g., work and parenting). Indicators of severity of feelings client is experiencing and the need for specifi c interventions to address these issues.
5. Determine the impact on general well-being (e.g., increased frequency of minor illnesses or exacerbation of chronic condition). Indicators of severity of feelings client is experiencing and need for specifi c interventions to resolve these issues
6. Note family communication and interaction patterns. Dysfunctional patterns of communication such as avoidance, preaching, and giving advice can block effective communication and isolate family members.
7. Determine availability and use of community resources and support groups. Can help the individual to feel less isolated and can promote feelings of inclusion and comfort.
8. Note community plans in place to deal with a major loss (e.g., team of crisis counselors stationed at a school to address the loss of classmates, vocational counselors or retraining programs, or outreach of services from neighboring communities). 

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To assist client/community to deal with situation: 
1. Provide an open environment and a trusting relationship. Promotes a free discussion of feelings and concerns.
2. Use therapeutic communication skills of active-listening, silence, and acknowledgment. Respect the client’s desire/request not to talk. These skills convey belief in client’s ability to deal with situation and develop a sense of competence. Client may not be ready to discuss feelings and situation, and respecting client’s own time line conveys confi dence.
3. Inform children about death or anticipated loss in age-appropriate language. Providing accurate information about impending loss or change in life situation will help the child begin the mourning process.
4. Provide puppets or play therapy for toddlers and young children. This may help them more readily express grief and deal with loss in ways that are appropriate to age.
5. Permit appropriate expressions of anger and fear. Note hostility toward or feelings of abandonment by spiritual power. (Refer to appropriate NDs; e.g., Spiritual Distress.) 
6. Provide information about the normalcy of individual grief reaction. 
7. Be honest when answering questions and providing information. Enhances the sense of trust and nurse-client relationship.
8. Provide assurance to the child that the cause for the situation is not his or her own doing, bearing in mind age and developmental level. This may lessen the sense of guilt and affi rm there is no need to assign blame to self or any family member.
9. Provide hope within the parameters of the specifi c situation. Refrain from giving false reassurance. 
10. Review past life experiences and previous loss(es), role changes, and coping skills, noting strengths and successes. This may be useful in dealing with the current situation and problem-solving existing needs.
11. Discuss control issues, such as what is in the power of the individual to change and what is beyond control. Recognition of these factors helps the client focus energy for maximal benefi t and outcome.
12. Incorporate family/SO(s) in problem-solving. Encourages family to support and assist client to deal with situation while meeting needs of family members.
13. Determine client’s status and role in family (e.g., parent, sibling, or child) and address loss of family member role. 
14. Instruct in use of visualization and relaxation techniques. 
15. Use sedatives or tranquilizers with caution. While the use of these medications may be helpful in the short term, dependence on them may retard passage through the grief process.
16. Mobilize resources when client is the community. When anticipated loss affects community as a whole, such as closing ofmanufacturing plant or impending disaster (e.g., wildfi re, hurricane, terrorist concerns), multiple supports will be required to deal with size and complexity of situation. 
17. Encourage community members or groups to engage in talking about the event or loss and verbalizing feelings. Seek out underserved populations to include in the process. 
18. Encourage individuals to participate in activities to deal with loss and rebuild community.

[Nursing Priority No. 4]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
 Give information that feelings are okay and are to be expressed appropriately. Expression of feelings can facilitate the grieving process, but destructive behavior can be damaging.
 Provide information that on birthdays, major holidays, at times of significant personal events, or anniversary of loss, client may experience (needs to be prepared for) intense grief reactions. If these reactions start to disrupt day-to-day functioning, the client may need to seek help. (Refer to NDs complicated Grieving; ineffective community Coping, as appropriate.) 
 Encourage continuation of usual activities or schedule and involvement in appropriate exercise program. 
 Identify and promote family and social support systems. A supportive environment enhances the effectiveness of interventions and promotes a successful grieving process. 
 Discuss and assist with planning for future or funeral, as appropriate. 
 Refer to additional resources, such as pastoral care, counseling, psychotherapy, community or organized support groups (including hospice), as indicated, for both client and family/SO(s), to meet ongoing needs and facilitate grief work.
 Support community efforts to strengthen, support, or develop a plan to foster recovery and growth. 
=========