::Impaired Parenting And Risk For Imapaired Parenting::

::Definition::
 - Impaired Parenting: Inability of the primary caretaker to create, maintain, or regain an environment that promotes the optimum growth and development of the child.
 - Risk For Impaired Parenting: Susceptible to primary caretaker difficulty in creating, maintaining, or regaining an environment that promotes the optimum growth and development of the child, which may compromise the well-being of the child. 
 
::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Note family constellation; for example, two-parent, single, extended family, or child living with other relative, such as grandparent. Helps identify problem areas and strengths  to formulate plans to change situation that is currently creating difficulties for the parents.
2. Determine developmental stage of the family (e.g., new baby, adolescent, child leaving or returning home). These maturational crises bring changes in the family that can be stressful to parents and the family. Provides direction for improving parenting skills and family interactions.
3. Assess family relationships between individual members and with others. These factors are critical to understanding individual family dynamics and developing strategies for change.
4. Assess parenting skill level, taking into account the individual’s intellectual, emotional, and physical strengths and weaknesses. Parents with signifi cant impairments may need more education and support. Ineffective parenting and unrealistic expectations contribute to problems of abuse and neglect.
5. Observe attachment behaviors between parental fi gure and child. Determine cultural signifi cance of behaviors. Failure to bond effectively is thought to affect subsequent parentchild interaction. Behaviors such as eye-to-eye contact, use of en face position, talking to the infant in a high-pitched voice, are indicative of attachment behaviors in American culture but may not be appropriate in another culture.
6. Note presence of factors in the child (e.g., birth defects, hyperactivity) that may affect attachment and caretaking needs.
7.  Identify physical challenges or limitations of the parents (e.g., visual or hearing impairment, quadriplegia, severe depression). May affect ability to care for child and suggest individual needs for assistance and support.
8. Determine presence and effectiveness of support systems, role models, extended family, and community resources available to the parent(s). Lack of or ineffective use of support systems increases risk of continued inability to parent effectively
9. Note absence from home setting or lack of child supervision by parent. Demands of working long hours, out of town, multiple responsibilities such as working and attending educational classes will affect relationship between parent and child and ability to provide the care and nurturing necessary for children to grow and prosper.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To foster development of parenting skills:
1. Create an environment in which relationships can be developed and needs of each individual met. Learning is more effective when individuals feel safe.
2. Make time for listening to concerns of the parent(s).
3. Emphasize positive aspects of the situation, maintaining a hopeful attitude to ward the parent’s capabilities and potentialfor improving the situation. 
4. Note staff attitudes toward parent/child and specifi c problem or disability; for example, needs of disabled parent(s) to be seen as an individual and to be evaluated apart from a stereotype. Negative attitudes are detrimental to promoting positive outcomes.
5. Encourage expression of feelings, such as helplessness, anger, frustration. Set limits on unacceptable behaviors. Individualswho lose control develop feelings of low self-esteem.
6. Acknowledge difficulty of situation and normalcy of feelings.Enhances feelings of acceptance.
7. Allow time for parents to express feelings and deal with the “loss.” Recognize stages of grieving process when the child is disabled or other than anticipated. Expectation of a “normal” or desired child (e.g., having a girl instead of boy, child with a prominent birthmark or birth defect such as cleft palate) results in grieving for the loss of that expectation.
8. Encourage attendance at skill classes (e.g., parent effectiveness). Assists in improving parenting skills by developing communication and problem-solving techniques.
9. Emphasize parenting functions rather than mothering/fathering skills. By virtue of gender, each person brings something to the parenting role; however, nurturing tasks can be done by both parents.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Involve all available members of the family in learning. 
2. Provide information appropriate to the situation, including time management, limit setting, and stress-reduction techniques. Facilitates satisfactory implementation of plan and new behaviors.
3. Discuss parental beliefs about child-rearing, punishment and rewards, teaching. Identifying these beliefs allows opportunity to provide new information regarding not using spanking and/or yelling and what actions can be substituted for more effective parenting. 
4. Develop support systems appropriate to the situation. Extended family, friends, social worker, home-care services may be needed to help parents cope positively with what is happening .
5. Assist parent to plan time and conserve energy in positive ways. Enables individual to cope more effectively with diffi culties as they arise.
6. Encourage parents to identify positive outlets for meeting their own needs (e.g., going out for dinner, making time for their own interests and each other, dating). Promotes general well-being, helps parents to be more effective and reduces burnout.
7. Refer to appropriate support or therapy groups, as indicated. 
8. Identify community resources (e.g., childcare services, respite house) to assist with individual needs, provide respite and support.
9. Report and take necessary actions, as legally and professionally indicated, if child’s safety is a concern. Parents/caregivers who engage in corporal punishment as a technique to ensure desired behavior of child are at increased risk for abusive behavior and possibility of childhood depression.
10. Refer to NDs ineffective Coping; compromised family Coping; risk for Violence [specify]; Self-Esteem [specify]; and interrupted Family Processes, for additional interventions as appropriate. 

=====