::Impaired Standing::

::Definition::
 Limitation of ability to independently and purposefully attain and/or maintain the body in an upright position from feet to head.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To identify causative/contributing factors:
1. Determine diagnosis that contributes to diffi culty with standing balance (e.g., stroke, other neurological disorders [e.g., multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson disease; traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury with hemi-/paraplegia]; vestibular disorders/vertigo; osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, degenerative joint disease; back pain conditions; lower-limb amputations; psychiatric conditions including severe depression, dementias). These conditions can cause postural and balance impairments, muscular weakness, and inadequate range of motion. Impaired standing balance has a detrimental effect on a person’s functional ability and increases the risk of falling. For example, sitting and standing balance are major concerns in an amputee’s ability to maintain the center of gravity over the base of support. 
2. Assess client’s mental status, noting age, developmental stage, and presence or potential for cognitive dysfunction (e.g., traumatic brain injury, stroke, dementia, extremes of age). Several studies have suggested that seemingly automatic postural tasks (e.g., standing balance and walking) require some attention and cognitive processing.
3. Determine fall risk, noting factors that may be present. Fall risk is high in clients with certain conditions (e.g., advanced age or debilitating disease; vision and hearing loss, diminished depth perception; decreased sensation in feet, artifi cial joints; trauma to lower extremity; amputation, or other surgery or immobilizer; presence of severe vertigo with postural sway; generalized or specifi c leg weakness; reaching upward, forward, or laterally outside of standing balance position).
4. Encourage sitting before attempting standing, when indicated (e.g., supine client with low blood pressure or dehydration, vertigo, or fi rst attempting to get up after long period on bedrest). Longer sitting pause times may improve postural stability after rising from a supine position.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assess functional ability: 
1. Determine functional status in relation to 0 to 4 scale, and note muscle strength and tone, joint mobility, cardiovascular status, balance, and endurance. Identifi es strengths and defi cits and may provide information regarding potential for recovery.
2. Determine degree of perceptual or cognitive impairment and ability to follow directions. Impairments (which may be related to age, chronic or acute disease condition, trauma, surgery, or medications) can necessitate alternative interventions or changes in plan of care.
3. Refer to physician, physical therapy specialists, as indicated to determine potential for improvement and direction for therapies.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimal level of function and prevent complications:
1. Assist with/refer for rehabilitation therapies and techniques for implementing standing activities. Various modalities may be used to gain physiological benefi ts from standing or modifi ed standing therapy to help preserve joint range of motion, improve muscle fl exibility, weight-bearing ability, and bowel and bladder function even when person is not upright.
2. Provide for safety measures as indicated by individual situation, including environmental management and fall prevention. (Refer to ND risk for Falls.)
3. Encourage client’s participation in self-care activities, and in physical or occupational therapies. Improves body strength and function, enhances self-concept and sense of independence.
4. Administer pain medications before activity as needed to permit maximal effort and involvement in activity.
5. Collaborate with nutritionist in providing nutritious foods and needed feeding assistance, maximizing client’s abilities in ingesting and swallowing (upright position) to optimize available energy for activities.
6. Demonstrate and assist with use of assistive devices (e.g., side rails, overhead trapeze, roller pads, safety belt, hydraulic lifts, or chairs) for position changes and safe transfers.
7. Refer to NDs Activity Intolerance, impaired bed Mobility, impaired physical Mobility, impaired wheelchair Mobility, impaired Transfer Ability, impaired Sitting, and impaired Walking for additional interventions.
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Encourage client’s/significant other’s (SO’s) involvement in decision-making as much as possible. Enhances commitment to plan, optimizing outcomes.
2. Demonstrate use of mobility devices (e.g., walkers, strollers, scooters, braces, prosthetics) and have client/care provider demonstrate knowledge about and safe use of device. Identify appropriate resources for obtaining and maintaining appliances or equipment. Safe use of mobility aids promotes client’s independence and enhances quality of life and safety for client and caregiver.
3. Refer to support and community services as indicated to provide care, supervision, companionship, respite services, nutritional and ADL assistance, adaptive devices or changes to living environment, fi nancial assistance, and so forth. 
=====

