::Impaired Religiosity And Risk For Impaired Religiosity::

::Definition::
 - Impaired Religiosity: Impaired ability to exercise reliance on beliefs and/or participate in rituals of a particular faith tradition. 
 - Risk For Impaired Religiosity: Susceptible to an impaired ability to exercise reliance on beliefs and/or participate in rituals of a particular faith tradition, which may compromise health.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Ascertain current situation (e.g., illness, hospitalization, prognosis of death, depression, lack of support systems, financial concerns). Identifies problems client is dealing with in the moment that may be affecting desire to be involved with religious activities.
2. Note client’s/significant other’s (SO’s) reports and expressions of anger, alienation from God, sense of guilt or retribution. Perception of guilt may cause spiritual crisis and suffering, resulting in rejection of religious symbols.
3. Determine sense of futility, feelings of hopelessness, lack of motivation to help self. Indicators that client may see no, or only limited, options, alternatives, or personal choices.
4. Assess extent of depression client may be experiencing. Some studies suggest that a focus on religion may protect against depression.
5. Note recent changes in behavior (e.g., withdrawal from others or religious activities; dependence on alcohol or medications). Lack of connectedness with self/others impairs ability to trust others or feel worthy of trust from others or God.
6. Determine client’s usual religious or spiritual beliefs, past or current involvement in specifi c church activities. Helps in directing discussions and potential interventions that client may fi nd helpful.
7. Note quality of relationships with SO(s) and friends. Individual may withdraw from others in reaction to stress of illness, pain, and suffering. Other people may be encouraging client to rely on religious beliefs at a time when individual is questioning own beliefs in the current situation.
8. Identify cultural values and expectations regarding religious beliefs or practices. Individuals grow up in a family that instills a value system within them. As the person grows up, ideas, values, and expectations may change or be strengthened by new information, different questioning, and alternative viewpoints, which may affect current situation.
9. Ascertain substance use or abuse. Individuals may turn to use of various substances during times of distress, and this can affect the ability to deal with problems in a positive manner.
10. Note socioeconomic status of individual/family. The poor may have high levels of personal religiosity yet may participate less in organized religion because they feel stigmatized by their situation (e.g., single mothers, those receiving public assistance, or those engaging in a lifestyle that confl icts with church norms).

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client/SO(s) to deal with feelings/situation:
1. Use therapeutic communication skills of refl ection and active-listening. Communicates acceptance and enables client to fi nd own solutions to concerns.
2. Encourage expression of feelings about illness, condition, death. As people age, they become more concerned about their own mortality, and others often see them as in poorhealth and as spiritual and religious. If they have been diagnosed with a long-term chronic or terminal illness, they may be feeling more angry and rejecting of God than seeking his help.
3. Have client identify and prioritize current or immediate needs. Dealing with current needs is easier than trying to predict the future.
4. Provide time for nonjudgmental discussion of individual’s spiritual beliefs and fears about impact of current illness and/ or treatment regimen. Helps clarify thoughts and promote ability to deal with stresses of what is happening.
5. Review with client past diffi culties in life and coping skills that were used at those times. 
6. Suggest use of journaling and reminiscence. Promotes life review and can assist in clarifying values and ideas, recognizing and resolving feelings or situation.
7. Discuss differences between grief and guilt and help client to identify and deal with each. Point out consequences of actions based on guilt. Individuals often feel guilty about the “what if’s” of life. Most of these guilty feelings are not based on reality, and when they are acted on, the individual does not get the release he or she seeks.
8. Encourage client to identify individuals (e.g., spiritual advisor, parish nurse) who can provide needed support. 
9. Review client’s religious affi liation, associated rituals, and beliefs. Helps client examine what has been important in the past, and may trigger some desire to reconnect with those previous beliefs.
10. Provide opportunity for nonjudgmental discussion of philosophical issues related to religious belief patterns and customs. Open communication can assist client to check reality of perceptions and identify personal options and willingness to resume desired activities.
11. Discuss desire to continue or reconnect with previous belief patterns, customs, and current barriers. As client begins to think about current feelings of alienation from previous religious connections, these discussions can help to clarify and allow client to think about how these beliefs can be regained.
12. Identify ways to strengthen spiritual or religious expression. There are multiple options for enhancing participation in faith community (e.g., joining prayer or study group, volunteering time to community projects, singing in the choir, reading spiritual writings).
13. Involve client in refi ning healthcare goals and therapeutic regimen, as appropriate. Identifi es role illness is playing in current concerns about ability to participate or appropriateness of participating in desired religious activities.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    -  To promote spiritual wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Have client identify support systems available.
2. Help client learn relaxation techniques, meditation, guided imagery, and mindfulness/living in the moment and enjoying it. 
3. Take the lead from the client in initiating participation in religious activities, prayer, other activities. Client may be vulnerable in current situation and must be allowed to decide own participation in these actions.
4. Provide privacy for meditation, prayer, or performance of rituals, as appropriate.
5. Explore alternatives or modifi cations of ritual based on setting and individual needs and limitations. Individual may not be able to go to a church or temple, so providing another setting—chapel in the facility or quiet room with appropriate religious artifacts or material—can provide the setting desired.
6. Assist client to identify spiritual resources that could be helpful (e.g., contacting spiritual advisor who has qualifi cations and experience in dealing with specifi c problems individual is concerned about). Provides answers to spiritual questions, assists in the journey of self-discovery, and can help client learn to accept and forgive self.

=====