::Impaired Resilience And Risk For Impaired Resilience ::

::Definition::
 - Impaired Resilience: Decreased ability to recover from perceived adverse or changing situations, through a dynamic process of adaptation. 
 - Risk For Impaired Resilience: Susceptible to decreased ability to recover from perceived adverse or changing situations, through a dynamic process of adaptation, which may compromise health. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors or potential stressors/
challenges:
1. Determine individuals, family, children involved and ages and current circumstances. Understanding the family makeup provides information that will guide choice of interventions.
2. Note underlying stressors, health concerns, debilitating conditions, mental health or behavioral issues such as unemployment, poverty, diabetes, obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Alzheimer disease, parental mental illness.
3. Assess functional capacity and how it affects client’s ability to manage daily needs. 
4. Identify locus of control. Individuals with external locus of control are less likely to feel in control or to rely on their own abilities or judgment to manage a situation.
5. Determine client’s education level, family dynamics, and parenting styles, if relevant. Drug use, violence, and poor impulse control affect individual’s ability to develop resilience in adverse situations or crisis. Individual may see self as a victim rather than a survivor.
6. Evaluate client’s ability to verbalize and understand current situation and impact of new crisis. Informed choice cannot be made without a good understanding of reality of situation.
7. Note communication patterns within the family. Skills learned within the family can determine whether the individual develops low self-esteem or positive feelings about self.
8. Identify maladaptive coping skills used by individual and in the family. Focusing on negative in situations impairs one’s ability to adjust positively and learn attributes of resiliency.
9. Note parental status including age and maturity. Young parents may lack ability to deal with family responsibilities, fi nancial concerns, factors associated with low socioeconomic status. 
10. Ascertain stability of relationship, presence of separation or divorce. Family members are vulnerable to break-up of the family unit and may see it as causing long-term harm.
11. Determine availability and use of resources, family, support groups, fi nancial aid. 
12. Note cultural factors and religious beliefs that may affect interpretation of, or response to, situation. Helps determine individual needs and possible options.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist client to improve skills to deal with adverse situations or crises.
1. Encourage free expressions of feelings, including feelings of anger and hostility, setting limits on unacceptable behavior. Unacceptable behavior leads to feelings of shame and guilt if not controlled.
2. Listen to client’s concerns and acknowledge diffi culty of adversity and making changes in situation. Being listened to provides opportunity for client to feel valued, capable, and like a survivor rather than a victim.
3. Help client assume responsibility for own life, look at situation as a challenge rather than an obstacle, and refrain from viewing crisis as insurmountable. People learn and develop resilience as they deal with adversities of life.
4. Provide information at client’s level of comprehension, being honest in explanations. Provides data to assist in decisionmaking process.
5. Have client paraphrase information provided during teaching session to ensure understanding and to provide opportunity to correct misunderstandings.
6. Promote parents’ involvement in developing a positive mindset for fostering resilience in their children. Parents are concerned that their children grow up to be competent adults. They can learn the parenting skills that promote optimal growth and resilience in their children for the problems they will face as grown-ups.
7. Facilitate communication skills between client and family. Sometimes, individuals who find themselves in diffi cult situations withdraw because they do not know what to do or say.
8. Focus on strengths of the individual as the problems are being assessed and diagnosed. Impr oving the future for the client is based on developing the capacity to deal successfully with the obstacles he or she meets in life.
9. Encourage client/parents to model empathy with family members. Empathy is an important interpersonal skill and a cornerstone of emotional intelligence; and children learn empathy when parents are empathic with them. 
10. Discuss individual issues, such as obesity, substance use, poor impulse control, violent behavior; provide information about the risks and help client/parent understand how they can help family members develop habits that will promote physical and mental well-being.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Reinforce that client is responsible for self, for choices made, and actions taken. The road to resilience is developed by the individual accepting that change is a part of living and then beginning to live life more fully.
2. Encourage an attitude of realistic hope. Client can accept that change is a part of living and, while some plans cannot be obtained because of crisis or new circumstances, new goals can be developed and life can move forward. 
3. Provide anticipatory guidance relevant to current situation and long-term expectations. 
4. Provide or identify learning opportunities specifi c to individual needs. Activities such as assertiveness, regular exercise, parenting classes can enhance knowledge and help develop a resilient mind-set.
5. Discuss use of the problem-solving method to set mutually agreed-on goals. As family accepts solutions that are acceptable to each member, their self-esteem is enhanced, and individuals are more apt to follow through on decisions.
6. Provide anticipatory guidance relevant to current situation and long-term expectations. Client may have many issues to resolve, and planning ahead can help individuals make changes, have hope for the future, and have a sense of control over their lives.
7. Encourage client/parents to take time for themselves. Provides opportunity for personal growth; respite allows individuals to pursue own interests and return to tasks of life/parenting with renewed vigor
8. Determine need or desire for religious or spiritual counselor and make arrangements for visit. Providing client an opportunity to discuss concerns about what has happened helps to build resilience to face future stressors.
9. Refer to community resources as appropriate, such as social services, financial, domestic violence/elder abuse program, family therapy, divorce counseling, special needs support services. 
=====

