::Impaired Social Interaction::

::Definition::
 Insufficient or excessive quantity or ineffective quality of social exchange. 

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Review social history with client/signifi cant other(s) (SO[s]) going back far enough in time to note when changes in social behavior or patterns of relating occurred or began: e.g., loss or long-term illness of loved one; failed relationships; loss of occupation, fi nancial, or social or political (power) position; change in status in family hierarchy (job loss, aging, illness); poor coping or adjustment to developmental stage of life, as with marriage, birth or adoption of child, or children leaving home.
2. Ascertain ethnic, cultural, or religious implications for the client because these impact choice of behaviors and may even script interactions with others.
3. Review medical history, noting stressors of physical or longterm illness (e.g., stroke, cancer, multiple sclerosis, head injury, Alzheimer disease); mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia); medications or drugs, debilitating accidents, learning disabilities (e.g., sensory integration diffi culties, autism spectrum disorder); and emotional disabilities. Conditions such as these can isolate individual who feels disconnected from others, resulting in diffi culty relating in social situations.
4. Determine family patterns of relating and social behaviors. Explore possible family scripting of behavioral expectations in the children and how the client was affected. May result in conforming or rebellious behaviors. Parents are important in teaching their children social skills (e.g., sharing, taking turns, and allowing others to talk without interrupting).
5. Observe client while relating to family/SO(s) to note prevalent interaction patterns.
6. Note presence of visual or hearing impairments. Individuals with these conditions may find communication barriers are increased, social interaction is affected, and interventions need to be designed to promote involvement with others in positive ways.
7. Encourage client to verbalize feeling of discomfort about social situations. Identify causative factors, if any, recurring precipitating patterns, and barriers to using support systems. 

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assess degree of impairment:
1. Encourage client to verbalize perceptions of problem and causes. Active-listen, noting indications of hopelessness, powerlessness, fear, anxiety, grief, anger, feeling unloved or unlovable, problems with sexual identity, hate (directed or not). These feelings arise from the anxiety that comes with the need to participate with others in social situations and can interfere with work, friendships, and life in general. 
2. Observe and describe social and interpersonal behaviors in objective terms, noting speech patterns, body language—in the therapeutic setting and in normal areas of daily functioning (if possible)—such as in family, job, social, or entertainment settings. Helps identify the kinds and extent of problems client is exhibiting.
3. Determine client’s use of coping skills and defense mechanisms. Symptoms associated with social anxiety affect ability to be involved in social situations, making client’s life miserable and seriously interfering with work, friendships, and family life.
4. Evaluate possibility of client being the victim of or using destructive behaviors against self or others. (Refer to NDs risk for other-/self-directed Violence.) Problems with communication lead to frustration and anger, leaving the individual with few coping skills, and may result in destructive behaviors.
5. Interview family, SO(s), friends, spiritual leaders, coworkers, as appropriate, to obtain observations of client’s behavioral changes and effects on others.
6. Note effects of changes on socioeconomic level, ethnic and religious practices.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To assist client/SO(s) to recognize/make positive changes in impaired social and interpersonal interactions:
1. Establish therapeutic relationship using positive regard for the client, active-listening, and providing safe environment for self-disclosure. 
2. Have client list behaviors that cause discomfort. Once recognized, client can choose to change as he or she learns to listen and communicate in socially acceptable ways.
3. Have family/SO(s) list client’s behaviors that are causing discomfort for them. Family needs to understand that the client is unable to use social skills that have not been learned.
4. Review/list negative behaviors observed previously by caregivers, coworkers, and so forth. Others may see behaviors and the problems associated with them, such as unwillingness to participate in necessary activities (e.g., eating in a public place, interviewing for a job) and may provide additional information needed to develop an appropriate plan of care.
5. Compare lists and validate reality of perceptions. Help client prioritize those behaviors needing change. Each individual may have a different view of what constitutes a problem; by comparing lists, each person hears how others view the problems, enabling the client/family to identify behaviors or concerns to be dealt with.
6. Explore with client and role-play means of making agreed-on changes in social interactions and behaviors. 
7. Role play random social situations in therapeutically controlled environment with “safe” therapy group. Have group note behaviors, both positive and negative, and discuss these and any changes needed. 
8. Role play changes and discuss impact. Include family/SO(s), as indicated. Having client participate in a controlled group environment provides opportunities to try out different behaviors in a built-in social setting where members can make friends and provide mutual advice and comfort.
9. Provide positive reinforcement for improvement in social behaviors and interactions. Encourages continuation of desired behaviors and efforts for change.
10. Participate in multidisciplinary client-centered conferences to evaluate progress. Involve everyone associated with client’s care, family members, SO(s), and therapy group.
11. Work with client to alleviate underlying negative self-concepts because they often impede positive social interactions. Attempts at trying to connect with another can become devastating to self-esteem and emotional well-being.
12. Involve neurologically impaired client in individual and/or group interactions or special classes, as situation allows. 
13. Refer for family therapy, as indicated, because social behaviors and interpersonal relationships involve more than the affected individual.

[Nursing Priority No.4]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Encourage client to keep a daily journal in which social interactions of each day can be reviewed and the comfort/ discomfort experienced noted with possible causes or precipitating factors. Helps client identify responsibility for own behavior(s) and learn new skills that can be used to enhance social interactions.
2. Assist the client to develop positive social skills through practice of skills in real social situations accompanied by a support person. Provide positive feedback during interactions with client. 
3. Seek community programs for client involvement that promote positive behaviors the client is striving to achieve.
4. Encourage classes, reading materials, community support groups, and lectures for self-help in alleviating negative selfconcepts that lead to impaired social interactions.
5. Involve client in a music-based program, if available. Music has been used to calm, to enable feelings of safety, and to reduce the social distance between people.
6. Encourage ongoing family or individual therapy as long as it is promoting growth and positive change. While therapy groups can be useful, individuals can become dependent on the process and not move on to managing on their own.
7. Provide for occasional follow-up, as appropriate, for reinforcement of positive behaviors after professional relationship has ended.
8. Refer to psychiatric clinical nurse specialist for additional assistance when indicated. 

=====