::ineffective Activity Planning/risk for Ineffective Activity Planning::

::Definition::
ineffective Activity Planning: Inability to prepare for a set of actions fixed in time and under certain conditions. 

risk for ineffective Activity Planning: Vulnerable to an inability to prepare for a set of actions fixed in time and under certain conditions, which may compromise health. 




::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
     To identify causative/precipitating or risk factors:
1. Determine circumstances of client’s situation that may impact participating in selective activities.
2. Determine individual problems with planning and followthrough with activity plan. Identifies individual diffi culties (e.g., anxiety regarding what kind of activity to choose, lack of resources, lack of confi dence in own ability).
3. Review the client’s health history. Underlying physical problems, such as fatigue or medication side effects, can affect the ability to engage in tasks.
4. Perform a complete physical examination. The client may have underlying problems, such as allergies, hypertension, asthma, or chronic pain, that are contributing to fatigue and difficulty with undertaking a task.
5. Review medication regimen for possible side effects affecting client’s desire to become involved in any activity.
6. Note the client’s ability to process information. Compromised mental ability, low self-esteem, and anxiety can interfere with dealing with planning activities.
7. Assess mental status; use Beck’s Depression Inventory as indicated.
8. Identify client’s personal values and perception of self including strengths and weaknesses. Provides information that will be helpful in planning care and choosing goals for this individual.
9. Determine client’s need to be in control, fear of dependency on others (although may need assistance from others), or belief he or she cannot do the task. This is indicative of external locus of control, where the client sees others as having the control and ability.
10. Identify cultural/religious issues that may affect how individuals deal with issues of life or how they see their ability to make choices or manage their own life.
11. Discuss awareness of procrastination, need for perfection, and fear of failure. Although the client may not acknowledge it as a problem, this may be a factor in his or her difficulty in planning for, choosing, and following through with activities that might be enjoyed.
12. Assess the client’s ability to process information. Low selfesteem, anxiety, and possibly difficulty with thinking may interfere with perceptions.
13. Discuss the possibility that the client is motivated by pleasure to avoid pain (hedonism). The individual may seek activities that bring pleasure to avoid painful experiences.
14. Note availability and use of resources. Client may have diffi culty if family and friends are not supportive and other resources are not readily available.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
     To assist client to recognize and deal with individual factors
that do or could interfere with activities, and begin to plan
appropriate activities:
1. Encourage the expression of feelings contributing to/resulting from a situation. Awareness of frustration and/or anxiety can help the client redirect energy into productive activities. Maintain a positive atmosphere without seeming overly cheerful.
2. Discuss the client’s perception of self as worthless and not deserving of success and happiness. Sometimes the underlying feelings are those of wanting to be perfect, and it is difficult to finish the task because of the fear that it will not be perfect (perfectionism).
3. Help the client learn how to reframe negative thoughts about self into a positive view of what is happening.
4. Encourage the client to recognize procrastinating behaviors and make a decision to change. Procrastination is a learned behavior and serves many purposes for the individual. It can be changed but requires motivation and strong desire.
5. Confront (in a gentle manner) the client’s ambivalent, angry, or depressed feelings.
6. Involve the client/significant other (SO) in planning an activity. Having the support of family and the nurse will help promote success.
7. Direct the client to break down the desired activity into specific small steps. This makes the activity more manageable, and as each step is accomplished, the client feels more confident about his or her ability to fi nish the task.
8. Accompany the client to an activity of his or her own choosing, encouraging participation together if appropriate. Support from the caregiver may enable the client to begin participating and gain confidence.
9. Assist the client in developing skills of relaxation, imagery/visualization, and mindfulness. Using these techniques can help the client learn to overcome stress and be able to manage life’s diffi culties more effectively.
10. Assist the client to investigate the idea that seeking pleasure (hedonism) is interfering with the motivation to accomplish goals. Some philosophers believe that pleasure is the only good for a person and that the individual does not see other aspects of life, which interferes with accomplishments.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
     To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Criteria): 
1. Assist the client in identifying life goals and priorities. If the individual has never thought about setting goals, he or she may begin to think about the possibility of being successful.
2. Review treatment goals and expectations of client/SOs. This helps clarify what has been discussed and decisions that have been made; it also provides an opportunity to change goals as needed.
3. Discuss progress in learning to relax and deal productively with anxieties and fears. As the client sees that progress is being made, feelings of worthwhileness will be enhanced, and the individual will be encouraged to continue working toward goals.
4. Identify community resources such as social services, senior centers, or classes to provide support and options for activities and change.
5. Refer for cognitive therapy as indicated. This structured therapy can help the individual identify, evaluate, and modify any underlying assumptions and dysfunctional beliefs and begin the process of change.
=====

