::Ineffective Role Performance::

::Definition::
 A pattern of behavior and self-expression that does not match the environmental context, norms, and expectations. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Identify type of role dysfunction: for example, developmental (adolescent to adult); situational (husband to father, gender identity); transitions from health to illness.
2. Determine client role in family constellation. Provides a point of reference for understanding changes due to health alterations (mental or physical), or lack of knowledge about role or role skills.
3. Identify how client sees self as a man or woman in usual lifestyle or role functioning. Each person has a perception of self that is important to know to understand changes that may be occurring.
4. Ascertain client’s view of sexual functioning (e.g., loss of childbearing ability following hysterectomy), which can affect how client views self in role as male or female, and may need specifi c interventions to resolve feelings of loss.
5. Identify cultural factors relating to individual’s sexual roles. Cultures defi ne male and female roles differently (e.g., Muslim culture demands that the woman adopt a subservient role, whereas the man is seen as the powerful one in the relationship).
6. Determine client’s perceptions or concerns about current situation. May believe current role is more appropriate for the opposite sex (e.g., passive role of the patient may be somewhat less threatening for women).
7. Interview SO(s) regarding their perceptions and expectations. The beliefs of individuals directly involved with the client and the situation (e.g., parents bringing a new baby home from the hospital, adult child assuming responsibility for elder parent) are important to understanding the new roles individuals are undertaking.
8. Identify availability and use of resources. Individual may be unaware of or have diffi culty accessing community support or assistance programs.
9. Investigate history of incidents of domestic violence in the family. Refer to appropriate psychiatric, support, and legal services, as indicated. The roles of perpetrator and survivor are diffi cult to alter without intensive therapy as well as support for other family members/children. Neither individual in this situation sees self as worthy and both have poor self-esteem. The perpetrator does not get what he or she wants through the use of violence, and the survivor (the battered person) often believes she or he deserves this treatment.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to deal with existing situation:
1. Discuss perceptions and significance of the situation as seen by client.
2. Maintain positive attitude toward the client.
3. Provide opportunities for client to exercise control over as many decisions as possible. Enhances self-concept and promotes commitment to goals.
4. Offer realistic assessment of situation while communicating sense of hope.
5. Discuss and assist client/SO(s) to develop strategies for dealing with changes in role related to past transitions, cultural expectations, and value or belief challenges. Helps those involved deal with differences between individuals (e.g., adolescent task of separation in which parents clash with child’s choices; individual’s decision to change religious affi liation).
6. Acknowledge reality of situation related to role change and help client express feelings of anger, sadness, and grief. Encourage celebration of positive aspects of change and expressions of feelings. Changes in role necessitated by illness, trauma, changes in family structure (new baby, child leaving home for college, elderly parent needing care), or any other circumstance and result in a sense of loss, and the need to deal with the feelings that accompany change.
7. Provide open environment for client to discuss concerns about sexuality. Embarrassment can block discussion of sensitive subject. (Refer to NDs Sexual Dysfunction; ineffective Sexuality Pattern.) 
8. Identify role model for client. Educate about role expectations using written and audiovisual materials. 
9. Use the techniques of role rehearsal to help client develop new skills to cope with changes.
10. Discuss use of medication, and refer as appropriate. Client may benefi t from antidepressants to combat depression, or psychotropic medications may be required to address other mental health issues.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Make information available for client to learn about role expectations or demands that may occur. Provides opportunity to be proactive in dealing with changes.
2. Accept client in changed role. Encourage and give positive feedback for changes and goals achieved. Provides reinforcement and facilitates continuation of efforts.
3. Refer to support groups, employment counselors, parent effectiveness classes, counseling/psychotherapy, as indicated by individual need(s). Provides ongoing support to sustain progress.
4. Refer to NDs Self-Esteem [specify]; impaired, risk for impaired, or readiness for enhanced Parenting. 
=====

