::Ineffective Sexuality Pattern::

::Definition::
 : Expressions of concern regarding own sexuality.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Obtain complete physical and sexual history, as indicated, including perception of normal function. Sexuality is multifaceted, beginning with one’s body, biological sex, and gender (biological, social, and legal status as girls or boys, women or men).
2. Note use of vocabulary (assessing basic knowledge) and comments or concerns about sexual identity. Components of sexual identity include one’s gender identity (how one feels about his or her gender) as well as one’s sexual orientation (straight, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered).
3. Determine importance of sexual activity and a description of the problem in the client’s own words. Be alert to comments of client/signifi cant other (SO), which may attempt to discount or mask signifi cance of concerns. Sexual concerns are often disguised as sarcasm, humor, or in offhand remarks.
4. Assess life cycle issues, such as adolescence, young adulthood, menopause, aging. All people are sexual beings from birth to death. Each transition has its own concerns and needs specifi c education to help the client deal with it in a healthy manner.
5. Elicit impact of perceived problem on SO/family. One’s values about life, love, and the people in one’s life are also components of one’s sexuality.
6. Note cultural values or religious beliefs and confl icts that may exist. Individuals are enculturated as they grow up and, depending on particular family views and taboos, may harbor feelings of shame and guilt about their sexual feelings.
7. Assess stress factors in client’s environment that might cause anxiety or psychological reactions (e.g., power issues involving SO, adult children, aging, employment, loss of prowess). 
8. Explore knowledge of effects of altered body function/limitations precipitated by illness (e.g., MS, arthritis, mutilating cancer surgery) or medical treatment of alternative sexual responses and expressions (e.g., undescended testicle in young male, gender change or reassignment procedure).
9. Review history of substance use (prescription medications, over-the-counter drugs, alcohol, illicit drugs). May be used by client to handle underlying feelings or anxiety.
10. Explore issues and fears associated with sex (pregnancy, sexually transmitted, trust and control issues, infl exible beliefs, preference confusion, lack of privacy, altered performance).
11. Determine client’s interpretation of the altered sexual activity or behavior (e.g., a way of controlling, relief of anxiety, pleasure, lack of partner). These behaviors (when related to body changes, including pregnancy, weight loss or gain, or loss of body part) may refl ect a stage of grieving.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client/SO to deal with individual situation:
1. Provide atmosphere in which discussion of sexual problems is encouraged and permitted. Sense of trust or comfort enhances ability to discuss sensitive matters.
2. Avoid value judgments— they do not help the client cope with the situation.
3. Provide information about individual situation, determining client needs and desires. 
4. Encourage discussion of individual situation, with opportunity for expression of feelings without judgment. Sexuality also includes feelings, attitudes, relationships, self-image, ideals, and behaviors, and infl uences how one experiences the world. ( Note: Nurse needs to be aware of and in control of own feelings and responses to the client’s expressions and/ or concerns.) 
5. Provide specifi c information and suggestions about interventions directed toward the identifi ed problems. Being specifi c about actions client can take (e.g., alternate sexual positions when arthritis prevents movement, talking about normalcy of sexual behavior when identity is being questioned), can lead discussion in appropriate direction to look for options or solutions.
6. Identify alternative forms of sexual expression that might be acceptable to both partners. When illness or trauma interfere with usual sexual expression, communicating satisfactorily with partner about alternatives is important to the relationship.
7. Provide anticipatory guidance about losses that are to be expected (e.g., loss of known self when transsexual surgery is planned, loss of body part with amputation). Surgical procedures (planned or unplanned) resulting in a major change in body image need specifi c intervention to provide information and support to integrate change.
8. Introduce client to individuals who have successfully managed a similar problem. Provides positive role model and support for problem-solving.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide factual information about problem(s), as identifi ed by the client.
2. Engage in ongoing dialogue with the client and SO(s), as situation permits.
3. Discuss methods, effectiveness, and side effects of contraceptives, if indicated. Assists individual/couple to make an informed decision on a method that meets own values or religious beliefs.
4. Refer to community resources (e.g., Planned Parenthood; gender identity clinic; social services; Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays), as indicated. 
5. Refer for intensive individual or group psychotherapy, which may be combined with couple or family and/or sex therapy, as appropriate.
6. Refer to NDs Sexual Dysfunction; disturbed Body Image; low Self-Esteem [specify]. 
=====

