::Ineffective Adolescent Eating Dynamics::

::Definition::
Altered eating attitudes and behaviors resulting in over- or under-eating patterns that compromise nutritional health

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Note age and developmental level of client and place in family order. The adolescent period of development is a period of vulnerability for the development of problems with eating. 
2. Discuss client’s perception of the current situation and motivation for change. Important to understand client’s belief and understanding and whether current situation is viewed as a problem.
3. Assess eating habits and nutritional intake. Helps determine behaviors to be changed and provides basis for planning care.
4. Identify family cultural/religious factors and fi nances. Personal beliefs and fi nances affect choices when developing meal plans.
5. Determine dynamics of family system. How the family deals with the adolescent is critical to the outcome of the illness. 
6. Perform a complete physical exam. Provides a baseline for comparison as client progresses through treatment.
7. Assess current weight to identify deviations from the norm and establish baseline parameters. 
8. Evaluate possibility of attention defi cit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Although research has lagged in this area, there are reasons to believe that girls with this disorder may be at increased risk for eating disorders, such as body dissatisfaction, showing distress through eating disorders, under- or overweight. 
9. Note issues of self-esteem client may express. Adolescents often struggle with concerns about their body in relation to others and often believe they are not as worthwhile as their peers.
10. Identify gender of the client, male or female. Although females outnumber males by a significant number, males make up an important aspect of this problem, are more reluctant to seek help, and may need special accommodations, such as an all-male treatment team. 
11. Discuss client’s/family’s eating patterns and attitudes toward food. Provides information that will be helpful to plan for needed changes.
12. Review laboratory studies refl ecting nutritional status. Helpful in identifying defi ciencies and therapeutic needs.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to develop skills to manage adequate nutritional needs: 
1. Promote therapeutic nurse/client/family relationship. A trusting relationship allows the individuals to freely share and be open and honest with self and therapist. 
2. Assist client to make achievable goals to maintain healthy eating habits. Increases likelihood of successful change. 
3. Refer to dietician. Provides information and guidance in determining individual nutritional needs incorporating child’s likes and being mindful of dislikes.
4. Talk about frequent use of processed or “fast food” sources for meals. Although this may expedite meals for the busy family, they do not provide the nutrition needed for growing children as well as general health of other family members and are not cost effective.
5. Emphasize need to avoid comparing self with others, encouraging client to look at positive aspects of self. Adolescents tend to look at friends, TV models, and others to model themselves after rather than accepting their body as alright as is.
6. Note perceptions client may express and discuss versus realities. Correcting misperceptions helps the adolescent adjust choices of food and activities for more positive results. 
7. Address physical/safety issues client presents. Physicalchanges in body that are occurring with client’s current eating habits affect how client views self-esteem and contributes to lack of attention to safety issues.
8. Remind family/friends that teasing client about body/eating habits is not to be done. Teasing can be damaging, regardless of whether client is obese or thin, and is counterproductive. 
9. Refer for family therapy as indicated. May help resolve parent and adolescent issues interfering with relationship and manifested in unhealthy eating behaviors.
10. Encourage client to become involved in enjoyable physical activities. Participation in these activities can enhance self-esteem, promote self-reliance and confi dence, and lead to improved weight management. 
11. (Refer to NDs chronic low Self-Esteem for additional interventions.)

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Involve client in school and social activities. Continuing studies will improve sense of accomplishment, and involvement in social groups provides opportunities to make friends and enjoy activities that may involve eating in accepted manner.
2. Talk with adolescent about involvement with social media. Social media is found to have a negative effect on self-esteem for adolescents and sharing this information can help the individual change her or his attitude. 
3. Identify appropriate online reference sites. Can provide information and recipes to help with meal planning over time to achieve long-term goals.
4. Identify community support programs and resources as needed. Useful in sustaining efforts for change.
5. Refer parents to parenting classes, such as Effectiveness Training, etc., group therapy. Will help parents learn how to interact with their growing adolescent as both develop positive relationships. 

=========