::Ineffective Child Eating Dynamics::

::Definition::
Altered attitudes, behaviors, and influences on 
child eating patterns resulting in compromised nutritional 
health. 

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Determine individual situation (e.g., bribing or forcing child to eat, excessive parental control over child’s eating experience, stressful mealtimes, inappropriate choice of foods). Provides information to develop plan of care.
2. Assess child’s health status, weight, age, stage of growth and development. Information needed to determine nutritional needs and desired change in weight. 
3. Ascertain family functioning and relationships that may affect child’s eating disorder. How family members interact with one another, arguments, or disagreements can affect child’s eating behaviors.
4. Note child’s eating habits, eating in isolation, unpredictable eating patterns, eating snacks between meals. These factors can lead to weight gain as child grows. 
5. Determine family habits of watching TV and other social media especially while eating. The infl uence of media (especially food commercials) on family and child’s eating of high-calorie unhealthy foods is well documented. 
6. Evaluate physical activities of all family members. Inactivity can contribute to increased risk of obesity. A signifi cant number of children are obese or overweight at an earlier age than in the past.
7. Note environmental factors including family functioning and parenting style, mother’s eating disorder or mental status, relationships between mother and child. Self-report interviews reveal problem areas for mothers and children to determine needs for intervention. Note: Although the primary focus has been directed toward mothers, either or both parents may have issues to be addressed. 
8. Identify family cultural/religious beliefs and fi nances. Personal beliefs and fi nancial resources affect how family views food and impacts meal plans

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist family/child to develop new habits/patterns of family functioning and eating behaviors: 
1. Develop therapeutic nurse/client relationship. Be attentive, provide encouragement for efforts, use skills of active-listening and I-messages to maintain open communication. Promote trusting situation in which client is able to express oneself and be honest and open with self and nurse. 
2. Discuss eating behaviors with family/child, identifying areas for change. Realizing how eating patterns affect children can enable parents to be willing to make changes for better nutrition and overall health. 
3. Help parents learn new methods of planning and cooking foods. Learning healthy ways of eating can help parents and children establish nutritionally sound habits of eating.
4. Discuss parental involvement with child’s eating behaviors. Parents may not trust child to make healthy choices for eating, resulting in over-involvement or anxious behaviors affecting child’s eating.

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To establish nutritionally adequate plan that meets needs of family members: 
1. Involve parents and child in developing achievable short- and long-term goals. Increases likelihood of success if all parties agree on the goals.
2. Consult with dietician. Provides information and guidance in determining individual nutritional needs incorporating child’s likes and being mindful of dislikes.
3. Develop plan taking into account previously determined problems of family’s eating behaviors. Sitting down as a family at regularly scheduled times in a “media-free zone” that encourages open family communication can reduce stress levels and enhance food intake.
4. Encourage parents to relax and allow child to make own decisions among foods offered for meal. Children will eat what they need when given the opportunity to make own choices. 
5. Talk about frequent use of processed or “fast food” sources for meals. Athough this may expedite meals for the busy family, they do not provide the nutrition needed for growing children as well as general health of other family members and are not cost effective

[Nursing Priority No. 4]
    - To establish nutritionally adequate plan that meets needs of family members: 
1. Emphasize importance of well-balanced nutrition intake within financial concerns. Individuals may never have learned how to shop for and prepare affordable quality foods.
2. Identify appropriate online reference sites. Can provide information and recipes to help with meal planning over time to achieve long-term goals. 
3. Assist in developing regular exercise and stress reduction programs. Helps family members learn ways to manage weight and stress levels, improving general well-being.
4. Refer parents to classes in parenting, nutritional food preparation, or therapeutic needs. Can be helpful when needed to assist family to learn new ways of dealing with issues/problems.
5. Identify community support programs and resources as needed. Useful in sustaining efforts for change.

=========