::Ineffective Infant Eating Dynamics::

::Definition::
Altered parental behaviors resulting in over- or undereating patterns. 

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Identify current situation and specifi c needs of infant and parents. Information necessary to defi ne needs and develop plan of care. 
2. Assess parents’ knowledge of infant feeding needs. Parents may require basic information or may just need additional information to understand current situation.
3. Note interaction between parent and infant. Parent may need assistance with handling infant, and caregiver is able to foster appropriate behavior and discourage maladaptive behavior. 
4. Obtain baseline weight and weigh on predetermined schedule. Weight loss can indicate problems with feeding, inability to suck suffi ciently and correctly, insuffi cient quantity of breast milk.
5. Determine sucking dynamics of the breastfed infant, especially preterm infants. Breastfeeding is the ultimate nutritional goal, and effective sucking is vital to accomplishing adequate intake. 
6. Note feeding problems, such as colic, vomiting, slow feeding, or refusal to eat. Mild to moderately severe issues may be managed by care provider, while more complicated cases may require referral to specialists.
7. Identify family cultural/religious beliefs and fi nances. Personal beliefs and fi nancial resources affect how family views feeding choice (i.e., breast or bottle) and food choices when solids are introduced.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To promote effective infant eating dynamics: 
1. Develop positive nurse/family relationship. Enables family to feel comfortable discussing issues with nurse, being open and honest about concerns and anxieties. 
2. Consult with dietician. Provides information and guidance in determining individual nutritional needs incorporating infant’s particular issues.
3. Provide information about normal growth, development, and nutritional needs when no problems are present. Helps parents understand what to look for as infant progresses. 
4. Discuss needs of infant with structural abnormalities (e.g., naso-oropharynx, larynx, and trachea, cleft lip or palate, esophagus, esophageal atresia or stenosis, stricture). Investigation of individual situation can identify specifi c needs, diffi culty with feeding, child’s growth pattern, interaction between parent and child.
5. Provide information about neurodevelopmental disability that has been identifi ed in newborn. Each situation will need individual assessment, how is the problem manifested, the problems with feeding, weight and development, what is the emotional climate in the family during feeding or other caregiving.
6. Discuss the basic food rules. Parents control what, when, and where infant is fed. Infant controls how much is eaten in order to learn internal regulation of eating in accordance with physiologic signals of hunger and fullness.
7. Give assistance to parents requiring help with management skills. Setting time limits for meals, ignoring non-eating behavior, and using positive reinforcement to motivate infant can promote positive feeding behaviors. 
-- Refer to ND ineffective infant Feeding Pattern for additional interventions. 

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Encourage family members to set realistic goals for achieving necessary lifestyle changes. Depending on the family situation, families will be dealing with problems as infant grows, and having written goals provides reminder of what needs to be done.
2. Discuss methods family can take to make needed changes in family functioning, parenting styles. Evidence exists to show that associations exist between family characteristics and feeding behavior problems in early childhood.
3. Identify support groups based on individual needs. Provides opportunity for parents to interact with others addressing similar issues.
4. Refer to community resources (e.g., public health visitor program, home care, day care/respite care, nutrition program/food bank). Additional support and assistance enhance parents’ opportunity for meeting established goals.
5. Refer to parenting classes, individual and family therapy and or psychiatric counseling, as indicated. Additional help willenable family to cope with problems in more positive ways.
6. Suggest participation in group or community activities, e.g., assertiveness classes, volunteer work. Involvement with others in these activities helps individuals to learn new ways of coping with problems in their own family.

=========