::Ineffective Relationship And Risk For Ineffective Relationship ::

::Definition::
 - Ineffective Relationship: A pattern of mutual partnership that is insufficient to provide for each other’s needs.  
 - Risk For Ineffective Relationship: Susceptible to developing a pattern that is insufficient for providing a mutual partnership to provide for each other’s needs. 

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess current situation and determine needs:
1. Determine makeup of family, length of relationship, fi nancial situation—parents/children, older/younger, other members of household. Stressors of family relationships within a household, diffi culties with child-rearing, older adult needing care, and fi nancial diffi culties can strain the relationship between partners.
2. Discuss individual’s perception of own and other’s needs and how partner sees own needs. Identifi es misperceptions and areas of disagreement.
3. Determine each person’s self-image and locus of control. View of self as a positive or negative individual who is in control or controlled by others infl uences behavior and how partners react to each other.
4. Assess emotional intelligence skills of each individual. This is the ability to recognize and control one’s own emotions and recognize the emotions of the other
5. Investigate cultural factors that may be affecting relationship and contributing to confl ict. Roles from family of origin for each person may promote confl ict when beliefs clash and neither is willing to change or even discuss their thinking.
6. Determine style of communication and understanding of nonverbal cues used by partners. Poor communication is unclear and indirect, leading to confl ict, ineffective problem-solving, and poor emotional bonding in families with problems.
7. Determine how partners deal with confl ict. Many individuals try to avoid confl ict instead of working to resolve it.
8. Determine how family as a whole functions. Situational dynamics can create confl ict as individuals take sides in disagreements, escalating the situation.
9. Ascertain ways in which family members deal with confl ict. Conflict is inevitable in relationships, and partners need to identify whether how they deal with it is effective or ineffective.
10. Identify concerns about sexual aspects of relationship from both partners’ viewpoints. Intimacy is an important part of a relationship; if both individuals are avoiding that activity, they will need to discuss specifi c ways to resolve these problems. 
11. Note medical problems that may be affecting sexual relationship. Conditions, such as hysterectomy, prostatitis, breast cancer, and erectile dysfunction may cause partners to withdraw from one another.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist partners to resolve existing confl ict or improve relationship :
1. Maintain positive attitude toward partners and family members. Safe environment allows individuals to speak freely, knowing they will not be judged for comments and opinions.
2. Discuss surface symptoms of dysfunctional relationships and the fact that these are not the problems that need to be dealt with. Individuals are often not aware of underlying emotions that are infl uencing their behavior and continue to focus on surface issues.
3.  Explore each partner’s emotional needs. Unconscious desires to gain acceptance, recognition, sense of being cared about or valued are often motivators for relationships.
4. Discuss and clarify nonverbal communication. Partners need to be aware of and ask about the meaning of body language, tone of voice, and subtle movements that convey positive or negative messages.
5. Assist partners/family to learn effective confl ict resolution skills such as the win-win method. Resolving to listen to each other’s needs and agree on a mutually acceptable solution provides new ways to resolve problems and enhances relationship.
6. Provide information about Active-listening technique. Avoids giving advice and encourages other person to fi nd own solution, enhancing self-esteem.
7. Have partners identify thoughts and feelings when starting a discussion with each other.
8. Recommend individuals verify what they believe the other has said. Allows speaker to correct misperception and respond more effectively.
9. Have partners role-play a specifi c conflict that is a frequent issue. Practicing how to defuse arguments and repair hurt feelings helps to identify other’s feelings and use new skills for resolution.
10. Encourage partners to maintain a calm demeanor. Staying focused enables individuals to think more rationally and come to a desired solution.
11. Have each person verify what he or she heard the other person say. Provides opportunity for the speaker to correct or acknowledge what was said.
12. Discuss sexual concerns and provide opportunity for questions. Conflict in the relationship inevitability affects these concerns, and providing information and discussing them can enhance intimacy.
13. Promote nonblameful self-disclosure when having a discussion. Not placing blame results in a more considerate and respectful resolution.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimal functioning of couple/family (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Help family members learn skill of active-listening. Avoids giving advice and allows others to fi nd their own solution, enhancing self-esteem.
2. Have partners acknowledge beliefs they have become aware of during therapy.
3. Encourage use of relaxation and mindfulness techniques. Helps individuals to ease anxiety and learn to relate to each other in a calm manner.
4. Discuss the appropriate use of humor and laughter in daily lives. Helps to break the tension and lighten diffi cult moments.
5. Recommend books, Web sites to provide additional information. 
6. Refer to support groups and classes as indicated. Parenting, assertiveness, and fi nancial assistance will help partners learn new skills as needed.
7. Include all family members in discussions, as indicated. Promotes involvement, provides opportunities for communication and clarifi cation of family dynamics, and enhances commitment to achieving goals.

=====