::ineffective Breastfeeding::

::Definition::
Difficulty feeding milk from the breasts, which 
may compromise nutritional status of the infant/child 

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To identify maternal causative or contributing factors: 
1. Assess client knowledge about breastfeeding and extent of instruction that has been given. 
2. Identify cultural expectations and conflicts about breastfeeding and beliefs or practices regarding lactation, let-down techniques, and maternal food preferences. Understanding impact of culture and idiosyncrasies of specifi c feeding practices is important to determine the effect on infant feeding. For example, in many cultures, such as Mexican American, Navajo, and Vietnamese, colostrum is not offered to the newborn. Intervention 
is only necessary if the practice/belief is harmful to the infant. 
3. Note incorrect myths/misunderstandings, especially in teenage mothers, who are more likely to have limited knowledge and more concerns about body image issues.
4. Encourage discussion of current and previous breastfeeding experience(s). 
5. Note previous unsatisfactory experience (including self or others), because it may lead to negative expectations.
6. Perform physical assessment, noting appearance of breasts and nipples, marked asymmetry of breasts, obvious inverted or fl at nipples, or minimal or no breast enlargement during pregnancy. Identifi es existing problems that may interfere with successful breastfeeding experience and provides opportunity to correct them when possible.
7. Determine whether lactation failure is primary (i.e., maternal prolactin defi ciency/serum prolactin levels, inadequate mammary gland tissue, breast surgery that has damaged the nipple, areola enervation [irremediable], and pituitary disorders) or secondary (i.e., sore nipples, severe engorgement, plugged milk ducts, mastitis, inhibition of let-down refl ex, and maternal/infant separation with disruption of feedings [treatable]).
8. Note history of pregnancy, labor, and delivery (vaginal or cesarean section), other recent or current surgery, preexisting medical problems (e.g., diabetes, seizure disorder, cardiac diseases, or presence of disabilities), or adoptive mother. While some conditions may preclude breastfeeding and alternate plans need to be made, others will need specifi c plans for monitoring and treatment to ensure successful breastfeeding
9. Identify maternal support systems or presence and response of signifi cant others (SOs), extended family, and friends. The infant's father and maternal grandmother (in addition to caring healthcare providers) are important factors that contribute to successful breastfeeding.
10. Ascertain the mother's age, number of children at home, and need to return to work. These factors may have a detrimental effect on desire to breastfeed. Immaturity may infl uence mother to avoid breastfeeding, believing that it will be inconvenient, or may cause her to be insensitive to the infant's needs. The stress of the responsibility of other children or the need to return to work can affect the ability to manage effective breastfeeding; mother will need support and information to be successful.
11. Determine maternal feelings (e.g., fear/anxiety, ambivalence, or depression).
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assess infant causative/contributing factors: 
1. Determine suckling problems, as noted in Related Factors/Defi ning Characteristics. 
2. Note prematurity and/or infant anomaly (e.g., cleft lip/palate) to determine special equipment/feeding needs.
3. Review feeding schedule to note increased demand for feeding (at least eight times a day, taking both breasts at each feeding for more than 15 min on each side) or use of supplements with artifi cial nipple. 
4. Evaluate observable signs of inadequate infant intake (e.g., baby latches onto mother's nipples with sustained suckling but minimal audible swallowing or gulping noted, infant arching and crying at the breasts with resistance to latching on, decreased urinary output and frequency of stools, or inadequate weight gain). 
5. Determine whether the baby is content after feeding or exhibits fussiness and crying within the fi rst hour after breastfeeding, suggesting unsatisfactory breastfeeding process.
6. Note any correlation between maternal ingestion of certain foods and “colicky” response of infant. Some foods may seem to result in reaction by the infant, and identifi cation and elimination may correct the problem
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To assist mother to develop skills of successful breastfeeding: 
1. Provide emotional support to the mother. Use one-to-one instruction with each feeding during hospital stay and clinic or home visit. Refer adoptive mothers choosing to breastfeed to a lactation consultant to assist with induced lactation techniques.
2. Discuss early infant feeding cues (e.g., rooting, lip smacking, and sucking fi ngers/hand) versus late cue of crying. Early recognition of infant hunger promotes timely/more rewarding feeding experience for infant and mother.
3. Inform the mother how to assess and correct a latch if needed. Demonstrate asymmetric latch aiming infant's lower lip as far from base of the nipple as possible, then bringing infant's chin and lower jaw in contact with breast while mouth is wide open and before upper lip touches breast. This position allows infant to use both tongue and jaw more effectively to obtain milk from the breast.
4. Recommend avoidance or overuse of supplemental feedings and pacifi ers (unless specifi cally indicated), which can lessen the infant's desire to breastfeed/increase risk of early weaning. Note: Adoptive mothers may not develop a full breast milk supply, necessitating supplemental feedings.
5. Restrict the use of nipple shields (i.e., only temporarily to help draw the nipple out) and then place the baby directly on the nipple. Shields prevent the infant's mouth from coming into contact with the mother's nipple, which is necessary for continued release of prolactin (promoting milk production) and can interfere with or prevent establishment of adequate milk supply. However, temporary use of shield may be benefi cial in the presence of severe nipple cracking.
6. Demonstrate the use of hand expression, hand pump, and piston-type electric breast pump with bilateral collection chamber when necessary to maintain or increase the milk supply.
7. Discuss/demonstrate breastfeeding aids (e.g., infant sling, nursing pillows, or footstool) to find the most comfortable ones for mother and infant. 
8. Suggest using a variety of nursing positions. Positions particularly helpful for plus-sized women or those with large breasts include the “football” hold with the infant's head to the mother's breast and body curved around behind mother or lying down to nurse.
9. Encourage frequent rest periods, sharing household/childcare duties to limit fatigue and facilitate relaxation at feeding times
10. Recommend abstinence/restriction of tobacco, caffeine, alcohol, drugs, and excess sugar, as appropriate, because they may affect milk production and the let-down refl ex or be passed on to the infant.
11. Promote early management of breastfeeding problems. For example: 
- Engorgement: Wear a supportive bra, apply heat and/or cool applications to the breasts, and massage from chest wall down to nipple to enhance let-down refl ex; soothe a “fussy baby” before latching on the breast; properly position the baby on the breast/nipple; alternate the side baby starts nursing on; nurse around the clock and/or pump with piston-type electric breast pump with bilateral collection chambers at least 8 to 12 times a day; and avoid using bottle, pacifi er, or supplements. 
- Sore nipples: Wear 100% cotton fabrics; do not use soap or alcohol/other drying agents on nipples; avoid the use of nipple shields or nursing pads that contain plastic; cleanse and then pat dry with a clean cloth; apply a thin layer of USP-modifi ed lanolin on the nipple, and administer a mild pain reliever as appropriate. Note: The infant should latch on to the least sore side or the mother should begin with hand expression to establish the let-down refl ex. Properly position the infant on the breast/nipple and use a variety of nursing positions. Break suction after breastfeeding is complete. 
- Clogged ducts: Use a larger bra or extender to avoid pressure on the site; use moist or dry heat; gently massage from above the plug down to the nipple; nurse the infant, hand express, or pump after massage; nurse more often on the affected side. 
- Inhibited let-down: Use relaxation techniques before nursing (e.g., maintain quiet atmosphere, massage the breast, apply heat to breasts, have beverage available, assume a position of comfort, place the infant on the mother's chest skin-to-skin). Develop a routine for nursing, and encourage the mother to enjoy her baby. 
- Mastitis: Promote bedrest (with infant) for several days; administer antibiotics; provide warm, moist heat before and during nursing; and empty breasts completely. Continue to nurse the baby at least 8 to 12 times a day or pump breasts for 24 hr and then resume breastfeeding as appropriate.
[Nursing Priority No. 4]
    - To condition the infant to breastfeed: 
1. Scent breast pad with breast milk and leave in bed with infant along with mother's photograph when separated from mother for medical purposes (e.g., prematurity). 
2. Increase skin-to-skin contact (kangaroo care). 
3. Provide practice times at breast for infant to “lick and learn.” 
4. Express small amounts of milk into the baby's mouth. 
5. Have the mother pump breast after feeding to enhance milk production. 
6. Use supplemental nutrition system cautiously when necessary. 
7. Identify special interventions for feeding in the presence of cleft lip/palate. These measures promote optimal interaction between mother and infant and provide adequate nourishment for the infant, enhancing successful breastfeeding.
[Nursing Priority No. 5]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1 Schedule a follow-up visit with the healthcare provider 48 hr after hospital discharge and 2 weeks after birth for evaluation of milk intake/breastfeeding process and to answer the mother's questions.
2. Recommend monitoring the number of infant's wet/soiled diapers. Stools should be yellow in color, and the infant should have at least six wet diapers a day to determine that the infant is receiving suffi cient intake.
3. Weigh the infant at least every third day initially as indicated, and record to verify adequacy of nutritional intake.
4. Educate father/SO about benefi ts of breastfeeding and how to manage common lactation challenges. Enlisting the support of the father/SO is associated with a higher ratio of successful breastfeeding at 6 mo.
5. Promote peer and cultural group counseling for teen mothers. This provides a positive role model that the teen can relate to and feel comfortable with when discussing concerns/feelings.
6. Review the mother's need for rest, relaxation, and time with other children as appropriate. 
7. Discuss the importance of adequate nutrition and fl uid intake, prenatal vitamins, or other vitamin/mineral supplements, such as vitamin C, as indicated. During lactation, there is an increased need for energy, and supplementation of protein, minerals, and vitamins is necessary to provide nourishment for the infant and to protect mother's stores, along with extra fl uid intake.
8. Address specific problems (e.g., suckling problems or prematurity facial anomalies). 
9. Discuss the timing of the introduction of solid foods and the importance of delaying until the infant is at least 4 mo, preferably 6 mo old. If supplementation is necessary, the infant can be fi nger fed, spoon fed, cup fed, or syringe fed. 
10. Inform the mother that return of menses varies in nursing mothers and usually averages 3 to 36 weeks with ovulation returning in 17 to 28 weeks. Return of menstruation does not affect breastfeeding, and breastfeeding is not a reliable method of birth control.
11. Refer to support groups (e.g., La Leche League, parenting support groups, stress reduction, or other community resources, as indicated). 
12. Provide bibliotherapy/appropriate Web sites for further information. 
=========

