::Insufficient Breast Milk Production::

::Definition::
Inadequate supply of maternal breast milk to 
support nutritional state of an infant or child.

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To identify maternal causative or contributing factors: 
1. Assess the mother's knowledge about breastfeeding and the extent of instruction that has been provided. Lack of knowledge, unresolved problems, or stories told by others may cause client to doubt abilities and chances for success
2. Identify cultural expectations and confl icts about breastfeeding and beliefs or practices regarding lactation, let-down techniques, and maternal food preferences. Understanding the impact of culture and idiosyncrasies of specifi c feeding practices is important to determine the effect on infant breastfeeding success.
3. Note incorrect myths/misunderstandings, especially in teenage mothers, who are more likely to have limited knowledge and more concerns about body image issues.
4. Identify maternal support systems and presence/response of significant others (SOs)/extended family. Negative attitudes and comments interfere with efforts and may cause client to prematurely abandon attempt to breastfeed.
5. Perform a physical examination, noting the appearance of inverted or fl at nipples, and minimal or no breast enlargement during pregnancy. Inadequate mammary gland tissue, breast surgery that has damaged the nipple, and areola enervation result in irremediable primary lactation failure.
6. Assess for other causes of primary lactation failure. Maternal prolactin defi ciency/serum prolactin levels, pituitary or thyroid disorders, and anemia may be corrected with medication.
7. Review lifestyle for common causes of secondary lactation failure. Smoking, caffeine/alcohol use, lack of adequate healthy food, birth control pills containing estrogen, becoming pregnant again; medications (e.g., antihistamines, decongestants, or diuretics), stress, and fatigue are known to inhibit milk production.
8. Determine the desire/motivation to breastfeed. Increasing the milk supply can be intense, requiring commitment to therapeutic regimen and possible lifestyle changes
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To identify infant causative or contributing factors: 
1. Observe the infant at breast to evaluate latching-on skill and the presence of suck/swallow diffi culties. Poor latching on and lack of audible swallowing/gulp are associated with inadequate intake. The infant gets substantial amounts of milk when drinking with an open-pause-close type of suck. Note: Open-pause-close is one suck; the pause is not a pause between sucks.
2. Evaluate the signs of inadequate infant intake. Infant arching and crying at the breast with resistance to latching on, decreased urinary output/frequency of stools, and inadequate weight gain indicate the need for further evaluation and intervention.
3. Review the feeding schedule—frequency, length of feeding, and taking one or both breasts at each feeding.\
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To increase mother's milk supply: 
1. Instruct on how to differentiate between perceived and actual insufficient milk supply. Normal breastfeeding frequencies, suckling times, and amounts not only vary between mothers but are also based on infant's needs/moods. Milk production is likely to be a refl ection of the infant's appetite, rather than the mother's ability to produce milk.
2. Provide emotional support to the mother. Use one-to-one instruction with each feeding during the hospital stay and clinic or home visits. Refer adoptive mothers choosing to breastfeed to a lactation consultant to assist with induced lactation techniques.
3. Encourage unrestricted frequency and duration of breastfeeding. Provides stimulation of breast tissue and may increase milk supply naturally.
4. Inform the mother how to assess and correct a latch if needed. Demonstrate an asymmetric latch aiming the infant's lower lip as far from the base of the nipple as possible, then bringing the infant's chin and lower jaw in contact with the breast while the mouth is wide open and before the upper lip touches the breast. Correct latching on is the most effective way to stimulate milk supply.
5. Demonstrate the breast massage technique to increase milk supply naturally. Gently massaging the breast while the infant feeds from it can improve the release of higher-calorie hindmilk from the milk glands.
6. Recommend using the breast pump 8 to 12 times a day. Expressing with a hospital-grade, double (automatic) pump is ideal for stimulating/reestablishing milk supply.
7. Suggest using a breast pump or hand expression after the infant fi nishes breastfeeding. Continued breast stimulation cues the mother's body that more milk is needed, increasing supply.
8. Monitor increased filling of breasts in response to nursing and/or pumping to help evaluate the effectiveness of interventions.
9. Recommend reducing or stopping supplemental feedings if used. Gradual tapering off of supplementation can increase frequency/duration of infant's breastfeeding, stimulating maternal milk production.
10. Discuss appropriate/safe use of herbal supplements. Herbs such as sage, parsley, oregano, peppermint, jasmine, and yarrow may have a negative effect on milk supply if taken in large quantities. A number of herbs have been used for centuries to stimulate milk production, such as fenugreek ( Trigonella foenum-graecum ), the most commonly recommended herbal galactogogue to facilitate lactation.
11. Discuss the possible use of prescribed medications (galactogogues) to increase milk production. Domperidone (Motilium) is approved by the American Academy of Pediatrics for use in breastfeeding mothers and has fewer side effects. Metoclopramide (Reglan) has been shown to increase milk supply anywhere from 72% to 110%, depending on how many weeks the mother is postpartum.
[Nursing Priority No. 4]
    - To promote optimal success and satisfaction of breastfeeding 
process for mother and infant: 
1. Encourage frequent rest periods, sharing household and childcare tasks. Having assistance can limit fatigue (known to impact milk production) and facilitate relaxation at feeding time.
2. Discuss with the spouse/SO the mother's requirement for rest, relaxation, and time together with family members. This enhances understanding of mother's needs, and family members feel included and are therefore more willing to support breastfeeding activity/treatment plan.
3. Arrange a dietary consult to review nutritional needs and vitamin/mineral supplements, such as vitamin C, as indicated. During lactation, there is an increased need for energy requiring supplementation of protein, vitamins, and minerals to provide nourishment for the infant.
4. Emphasize the importance of adequate fl uid intake. Alternating types of fl uids (e.g., water, juice, decaffeinated tea/coffee, and milk) enhances intake, promoting milk production. Note: Beer and wine are not recommended for increasing lactation.
5. Promote peer counseling for teen mothers. This provides a positive role model that the teen can relate to and feel comfortable with discussing concerns and feelings.
6. Recommend monitoring the number of infant's wet and soiled diapers. Stools should be yellow in color, and the infant should have at least six wet diapers a day to determine that the infant is receiving suffi cient intake.
7. Weigh the infant every 3 days, or as directed by the primary provider/lactation consultant, and record. This monitors weight gain, verifying the adequacy of intake or the need for additional interventions.
8. Identify products/programs for cessation of smoking. Smoking can interfere with the release of oxytocin, which stimulates the let-down refl ex.
9. Refer to support groups (e.g., La Leche League, parenting support groups, stress reduction, or other community 
resources), as indicated. 
========= 

