::Interrupted Breastfeeding::

::Definition::
Break in the continuity of providing milk from the 
breasts, which may compromise breastfeeding success and/
or nutritional status of the infant/child.

::Actions/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To identify causative/contributing factors: 
1. Assess client knowledge and perceptions about breastfeeding and extent of instruction that has been given. 
2. Note myths/misunderstandings, especially in some cultures and in teenage mothers, who are more likely to have limited knowledge and concerns about body image issues.
3. Ascertain cultural expectations/conflicts. In the United States, breastfeeding rates vary, not only by race and ethnicity, but also by geographic location.
4. Encourage the discussion of current/previous breastfeeding experience(s). This is useful for determining efforts needed to continue breastfeeding, if desired, while circumstances interrupting process are resolved, if possible.
5. Determine maternal responsibilities, routines, and scheduled activities. Caretaking of siblings, employment in or out of the home, and work or school schedules of family members may affect ability to visit hospitalized infant when this is the reason for mother/infant separation.
6. Identify factors necessitating interruption, or occasionally cessation, of breastfeeding (e.g., maternal illness, drug use)and desire or need to wean infant. In general, infants with chronic diseases benefi t from breastfeeding. Only a few maternal infections (e.g., HIV, active/untreated tuberculosis for initial 2 weeks of multidrug therapy, active herpes simplex of the breasts, and development of chickenpox within 5 days prior to delivery or 2 days after delivery) are hazardous to breastfeeding infants. Also, the use of anti-retroviral medications/chemotherapy agents or maternal substance abuse usually requires weaning of the infant. Exposure to radiation therapy requires interruption of breastfeeding for the length of time radioactivity is known to be present in breast milk and is therefore dependent on the agent used. Note: Mother can “pump and dump” her breast milk to maintain supply and continue to breastfeed after her condition has resolved (e.g., chickenpox). 
7. Determine support systems available to the mother/family. The infant's father and maternal grandmother, in addition to caring healthcare providers, are important factors that contribute to successful breastfeeding.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist the mother to maintain breastfeeding if desired: 
1. Provide information as needed regarding the need/decision to interrupt breastfeeding. 
2. Give emotional support to the mother and support her decision regarding cessation or continuation of breastfeeding. Many women are ambivalent about breastfeeding, and providing information about the pros and cons of both breastfeeding and bottle feeding, along with support for the mother's/couple's decision, will promote a positive experience.
3. Promote peer counseling for teen mothers. This provides a positive role model that the teen can relate to and feel comfortable with discussing concerns/feelings.
4. Educate the father/significant other (SO) about the benefits of breastfeeding and how to manage common lactationchallenges. Enlisting the support of the father/SO is associated with a higher ratio of successful breastfeeding at 6 mo.
5. Discuss/demonstrate breastfeeding aids (e.g., infant sling, nursing footstool/pillows, hand expression, manual and/or piston-type electric breast pumps). This enhances comfort and relaxation for breastfeeding. When circumstances dictate that the mother and infant are separated for a time, whether by illness, prematurity, or returning to work or school, the milk supply can be maintained by use of the pump. Storing the milk for future use enables the infant to continue to receive the value of breast milk. Learning the correct technique is important for successful use of the pump.
6. Suggest abstinence/restriction of tobacco, caffeine, excess sugar, alcohol, certain medications, all illicit drugs, as appropriate, when breastfeeding is reinitiated, because they may affect milk production/let-down refl ex or be passed on to the infant.
7. Review techniques for expression and storage of breast milk to provide optimal nutrition and promote continuation of breastfeeding process.
8 Problem-solve return-to-work (or school) issues or periodic infant care requiring bottle/supplemental feeding. 
9. Provide privacy/calm surroundings when the mother breastfeeds in a hospital/work setting. Note: Federal Law 2010 requires an employer to provide a place and reasonable break time for an employee to express her breast milk for her baby for 1 yr after birth.
10. Determine if a routine visiting schedule or advance warning can be provided so that the infant will be hungry/ready to feed.
11. Recommend using expressed breast milk instead of formula or at least partial breastfeeding for as long as mother and child are satisfi ed. This prevents permanent interruption in breastfeeding, decreasing the risk of premature weaning.
12. Encourage the mother to obtain adequate rest, maintain fl uid and nutritional intake, continue her prenatal vitamins, and schedule breast pumping every 3 hr while awake, as indicated, to sustain adequate milk production and breastfeeding process.

[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To promote successful infant feeding: 
1. Recommend/provide for infant sucking on a regular basis, especially if gavage feedings are part of the therapeutic regimen. This reinforces that feeding time is pleasurable and enhances digestion.
2. Explain anticipated changes in feeding needs and frequency. Growth spurts require increased intake or more feedings by infant.
3. Discuss the proper use and choice of supplemental nutrition and alternate feeding methods (e.g., bottle/syringe) if desired. 
4. Review safety precautions (e.g., proper fl ow of formula from nipple, frequency of burping, holding bottle instead of propping, formula preparation, and sterilization techniques)

[Nursing Priority No. 4]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Encourage mother to obtain adequate rest, maintain fl uid and nutritional intake, continue to take her prenatal vitamins, and schedule breast pumping every 3 hr while awake, as indicated. Sustains adequate milk production and enhances breastfeeding process when mother and infant are separated for any reason.
2. Identify other means (other than breastfeeding) of nurturing and strengthening infant attachment (e.g., comforting, consoling, or play activities). 
3. Refer to support groups (e.g., La Leche League or Lact-Aid), community resources (e.g., a public health nurse; a lactation specialist; Women, Infants, and Children program; and electric pump rental programs). 
4. Promote the use of bibliotherapy/appropriate Web sites for further information. 
5. Discuss the timing of the introduction of solid foods and the importance of delaying until the infant is at least 4 mo, preferably 6 mo old, if possible. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization (WHO) recommend delaying solids until at least 6 mo. If supplementation is necessary, the infant can be fi nger fed, spoon fed, cup fed, or syringe fed.

[Nursing Priority No. 5]
    - To assist the mother in the weaning process when desired: 
1. Provide emotional support to the mother and accept decision regarding cessation of breastfeeding. Feelings of sadness are common, even if weaning is the mother's choice.
2. Discuss reducing the frequency of daily feedings and breast pumping by one session every 2 to 3 days. This is the preferred method of weaning, if circumstance permits, to reduce problems associated with engorgement.
3. Encourage wearing a snug, well-fi tting bra, but refrain from binding breasts because of increased risk of clogged milk ducts and infl ammation.
4. Recommend expressing some milk from breasts regularly each day over a period of 1 to 3 weeks, if necessary, to reduce discomfort associated with engorgement until milk production decreases.
5. Suggest holding the infant differently during bottle feeding/interactions or having another family member give the infant's bottle feeding to prevent infant rooting for breast and to prevent stimulation of nipples.
6. Discuss the use of ibuprofen/acetaminophen for discomfort during the weaning process.
7. Suggest the use of ice packs to breast tissue (not nipples) for 15 to 20 min at least four times a day to help reduce swelling during sudden weaning.
=========