::interrupted Family Processes::

::Definition::
: Break in the continuity of family functioning, which fails to support the well-being of its members. 

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess individual situation for causative/contributing factors: 
1. Determine pathophysiology, illness/trauma, or developmental crisis present. 
2. Identify family developmental stage (e.g., marriage, birth of a child, children leaving home). This provides a baseline for establishing a plan of care.
3. Note components and availability of the family: parent(s), children, male/female, and extended family. Affects how individuals deal with current stressors. Relationships among members may be supportive or strained.
4. Observe patterns of communication in the family. Are feelings expressed? Freely? Who talks to whom? Who makes decisions? For whom? Who visits? When? What is the interaction between family members? This identifi es weakness/areas of concern to be addressed as well as strengths that can be used for resolution of the problem.
5. Assess boundaries of family members. Do members share family identity and have little sense of individuality? Do they seem emotionally distant and not connected with one another? Answers to these questions help identify specifi c problems needing to be addressed.
6. Ascertain role expectations of family members. Who is the ill member (e.g., nurturer, provider)? How does the illness affect the roles of others? Clear identifi cation and sharing of these expectations promote understanding. Family members may expect client to continue to perform usual role or may not allow client to do anything (either action can create problems for the ill member).
7. Identify “family rules”; for example, how adult concerns (finances, illness, etc.) are kept from the children. Setting positive family rules with all family members participating can promote a more functional family.
8. Determine effectiveness of parenting skills and parents’ expectations. 
9. Note energy direction. Are efforts at resolution/problem-solving purposeful or scattered? 
10. Listen for expressions of despair or helplessness (e.g., “I don’t know what to do”) to note degree of distress and inability to handle what is happening.
11. Note cultural and/or religious factors that may affect perceptions/expectations of family members.
12. Assess availability and use of support systems outside of the family. Having these resources can help the family begin to pull together and deal with current problems they are facing.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist family to deal with situation/crisis: 
1. Deal with family members in a warm, caring, and respectful way. 
2. Acknowledge difficulties and realities of the situation. This reinforces that some degree of confl ict is to be expected and can be used to promote growth
3. Encourage expressions of anger. Avoid taking comments personally as the client is usually angry at the situation over which he or she has little or no control. Feelings of anger are to be expected when individuals are dealing with a difficult situation. Appropriate expression enables progress toward problem resolution.
4. Emphasize the importance of continuous, open dialogue between family members to facilitate ongoingproblem-solving.
5. Provide and reinforce information, as necessary, in verbal and written formats. 
6. Assist the family to identify and encourage their use of previously successful coping behaviors. 
7. Recommend contact by family members on a regular, frequent basis. Promotes feelings of warmth and caring and brings family closer to one another, enabling them to manage current diffi cult situation.
8. Arrange for and encourage family participation in multidisciplinary team conference or group therapy, as appropriate. 
9. Involve the family in social support and community activities of their interest and choice. 
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Encourage the use of stress-management techniques (e.g., appropriate expression of feelings, relaxation exercises). 
2. Provide educational materials and information. Learning about the problems they are facing can assist family members in resolution of current crisis.
3. Refer to classes (e.g., parent effectiveness, specifi c disease/disability support groups, self-help groups, clergy, psychological counseling, and family therapy), as indicated. 
4. Assist the family with identifying situations that may lead to fear or anxiety. (Refer to NDs Fear; Anxiety.) 
5. Involve the family in planning for future and mutual goal setting. This promotes commitment to goals/continuation of plan.
6. Identify community agencies (e.g., Meals on Wheels, visiting nurse, trauma support group, American Cancer Society, or Veterans Administration) for both immediate and long-term support. 
=========

