::Labor Pain::

::Definition::
  Sensory and emotional experience that varies from pleasant to unpleasant, associated with labor and childbirth. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To determine client’s individual needs:
1. Identify stage and phase of labor; perform vaginal examination noting nature and amount of vaginal show, cervical dilation, effacement, fetal station, and fetal descent. Choice and timing of medications are affected by degree of dilation and contractile pattern. 
2. Note timing of initiation of prenatal care and participation in childbirth education classes. Economic, emotional, and cultural concerns can limit the mother’s access or involvement in preparation for labor, increasing her need for information and support.
3. Evaluate degree of discomfort through verbal and nonverbal cues; note cultural influences on pain response. Attitudes and reactions to pain are individual and based on past experiences, understanding of physiological changes, and familial/cultural expectations.
4. Ascertain presence of a birth plan, individual expectations, and cultural or religious beliefs affecting the labor and delivery process. Cultural infl uences may include how the laboring mother views pain management, as well as who attends the mother during the birth process.
5. Determine availability and preparation of support person(s). Presence of a supportive partner, family/friend, or doula can provide emotional support and enhance level of comfort.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To engage client in nonpharmacologic pain management techniques:
1. Provide/encourage use of comfort measures (e.g., back/leg rubs, sacral pressure, back rest, mouth care, repositioning; shower/hot tub use; cool, moist cloths to face and neck; hot compresses to perineum, abdomen; perineal care, linen changes). Promotes relaxation and hygiene, which enhance feeling of well-being and may reduce the need for analgesia or anesthesia. Position changes can also enhance circulation, reduce muscle tension.
2. Assess client’s desire for physical touch during contractions. Touch may serve as a distraction, provide supportive reassurance and encouragement, and may aid in maintaining sense of control and reducing pain. Note: Remain respectful of client’s preferences regarding touch. 
3. Coach use of appropriate breathing/relaxation techniques and abdominal effleurage based on stage of labor. May block pain impulses within the cerebral cortex through conditioned responses and cutaneous stimulation and gives client a means of coping with and controlling the level of discomfort.
4. Recommend client void every 1–2 hr. Reduces bladder distention, which can increase discomfort and prolong labor.
5. Review birth plan. Provide information about stage of labor and projected delivery, available analgesics, usual responses/ side effects (client and fetal), and duration of analgesic effect in light of current situation. Empowers client to makeinformed choice about means of pain control. 
6.  Assist with complementary therapies as indicated (e.g., acupressure/acupuncture, moxibustion, hypnosis, refl exology). Some clients and healthcare providers may prefer a trial of therapies theorized to stimulate/regulate contractions, reduce muscle tension, and mediate perception of pain before pursuing pharmacological interventions.
7. Provide for a quiet environment that is adequately ventilated, dimly lit, and free of unnecessary personnel. Nondistracting environment provides optimal opportunity for rest and relaxation between contractions.
8. Offer encouragement, provide information about labor progress, and provide positive reinforcement for client’s/couple’s efforts. Provides emotional support, which can reduce fear, lower anxiety levels, and help minimize pain.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    -  To provide more intensive pain management measures: 
1. Time and record the frequency, intensity, and duration of uterine contractile pattern per protocol. Information necessary for choosing appropriate interventions and preventing or limiting undesired side effects of medication.
2. Review birth plan, provide positive feedback for efforts to date, and be supportive of client’s decisions regarding pain management. Each labor and delivery experience is different and can challenge prenatal expectations. Acceptance and support from the nurse can enhance coping and promote a more positive birth experience.
3. Provide safety measures (e.g., encourage client to move slowly, bed in low position, raise side rails) as indicated post medication administration. Regional block anesthesia produces vasomotor paralysis, so sudden movement may precipitate hypotension and risk for fall.
4. Administer analgesic, such as butorphanol tartrate (Stadol) or meperidine hydrochloride (Demerol), by IV during contractions or deep intramuscular (IM) if indicated during active phase of stage I labor. IV route provides more rapid and equal absorption of analgesic, and IM route may require up to 45 min to reach adequate plasma levels. Administering IV drug during uterine contraction decreases amount of medication that immediately reaches fetus.
5. Monitor maternal vital signs and fetal heart rate (FHR)variability after drug administration. Note drug’s effectiveness and the physiological response. Narcotics can have a depressant effect on fetus, particularly when administered 2–3 hr before delivery.
6. Prepare for/assist with neuraxial anesthesia (i.e., epidural or caudal block anesthesia) using an indwelling catheter. Provides relief once active labor is established. Note: Use of ultra–low dose epidural is being promoted to achieve pain control without negative effect on client’s ability to sense contractions and push effectively.
7. Monitor FHR electronically, and note decreased variability or bradycardia. Decreased FHR variability is a common side effect of many anesthetics/analgesics. These side effects can begin 2–10 min after administration of anesthetic and may last for 5–10 min on occasion.
8. Monitor level of block per protocol. Migration of decreased sensation from belly button (dermatome T-10) to tip of breastbone (approximately T-6) increases risk of respiratory depression and profound hypotension.
9. Turn client side to side periodically during continuous infusions. Promotes even distribution of drug to prevent “onesided” or unilateral block.
10. Inform client of onset of contractions as appropriate. Client may “sleep” and/or encounter partial amnesia between contractions, impairing her ability to recognize contractions as they begin and her ability to initiate pain management techniques. 
11. Provide information about type of regional analgesia/anesthesia available at stage II specifi c to the delivery setting (e.g., local, pudendal block, lumbar epidural reinforcement, spinal block). Although client is stressed, she still needs to be in control and make informed decisions regarding anesthesia.
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    - To support delivery process: 
1. Note perineal bulging or vaginal show. Discomfort levels increase as cervix dilates, fetus descends, and small blood vessels rupture.
2. Assist client in assuming optimal position for bearing down (e.g., squatting or lateral recumbent). Proper positioning with relaxation of perineal tissue optimizes bearingdown efforts, facilitates labor progress, and reduces discomfort. 
3. Assist with reinforcement of medication via indwelling lumbar epidural catheter when caput is visible. Reduces discomfort associated with episiotomy, forceps application if needed, and fetal expulsion.
4. Assist as needed with administration of local anesthetic just before episiotomy, if performed. Anesthetizes perineum tissue for incision/repair purposes.
=====

