::Parental Role Conflict::

::Definition::
 Parental experience of role confusion and conflict in response to crisis. 
 
::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributory factors:
1. Assess individual situation and parent’s perception of/concern about what is happening and expectations of self as caregiver.
2. Note parental status, including age and maturity, stability of relationship, single parent, other responsibilities. Young parents may lack the necessary maturity to deal with unexpected illness of infant or child. Single parent may feel overwhelmed in trying to balance work and caretaking responsibilities. Increasing numbers of elderly individuals are providing full-time care for young grandchildren whose parents are unavailable or unable to provide care.
3. Ascertain parent’s understanding of child’s developmental stage and expectations for the future to identify misconceptions and strengths.
4. Note coping skills currently being used by each individual as well as how problems have been dealt with in the past. Provides basis for comparison and reference for client’s coping abilities.
5. Determine use of substances (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, including prescription medications). May interfere with individual’s ability to cope and problem-solve.
6. Assess availability and use of resources, including extended family, support groups, and fi nancial. 
7. Perform testing, such as Parent-Child Relationship Inventory, for further evaluation as indicated.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist parents to deal with current crisis: 
1. Encourage free verbal expression of feelings (including negative feelings of anger and hostility), setting limits on inappropriate behavior. Verbalization of feelings enables parent(s) to sift through situation and begin to deal with reality of what is happening. Inappropriate behavior is not helpful for dealing with the situation and will lead to feelings of guilt and low self-worth.
2. Acknowledge difficulty of situation and normalcy of feeling overwhelmed and helpless. Encourage contact with parents who experienced similar situation with child and had positive outcome.
3. Provide information in an honest and forthright manner at level of understanding of the client, including technical information when appropriate. Helping client understand what is happening corrects misconceptions and helps to make decisions that meet individual needs.
4. Promote parental involvement in decision-making and care as much as possible/desired. Enhances sense of control
5. Encourage interaction/facilitate communication between parent(s) and children.
6. Promote use of assertiveness, relaxation skills to help individuals deal with situation/crisis.
7. Assist parent(s) to learn proper administration of medications and treatments, as indicated. Knowing how to do these activities enhances parent’s sense of control and comfort in their ability to handle situation, when involved in child’s care.
8. Provide for and encourage use of respite care and parent time off. Parents are important, children are important, and the family is important, and when parents take time forthemselves, it enhances their emotional well-being and promotes ability to deal with ongoing situation.
9. Provide for, or encourage use of, respite care, parental time off to enhance emotional well-being.
10. Help single parent distinguish between parent love and partner love. Love is constant, but attention can be given to one or the other, as appropriate.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide anticipatory guidance to encourage making plans for future needs.
2. Encourage parents to set realistic and mutually agreed-on goals. People are more apt to follow through on decisions that they are involved in making.
3. Discuss attachment behaviors such as breastfeeding on cue, cosleeping, baby-wearing (carrying baby around on chest/back), and playing. Dealing with ill child/home-care pressures can strain the bond between parent and child. Activities such as these encourage secure relationships.
4. Provide and identify learning opportunities specifi c to needs (e.g., parenting classes, healthcare equipment use/ troubleshooting). 
5. Refer to community resources, as appropriate (e.g., visiting nurse, respite care, social services, psychiatric care or family therapy, well-baby clinics, special needs support services).
6. Refer to ND impaired Parenting for additional interventions. 

=====