::Powerlessness And Risk For Powerlessness::

::Definition::
 - Powerlessness: The lived experience of lack of control over a situation, including a perception that one’s own actions do not significantly affect an outcome.
 - Risk For Powerlessness: Susceptible to the lived experience of lack of control over a situation, including a perception that one’s actions do not significantly affect an outcome, which may compromise health.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Identify situational circumstances (e.g., unfamiliar environment, immobility, diagnosis of terminal or chronic illness, lack of support system, lack of knowledge about situation).
2. Determine client’s perception and knowledge of condition and treatment plan.
3. Ascertain client’s response to treatment regimen. Does client see reason(s) and understand regimen is in the client’s best interest, or is client compliant and helpless? 
4. Identify client’s locus of control: internal (expressions of responsibility for self and ability to control outcomes—“I didn’t quit smoking”) or external (expressions of lack of control over self and environment—“Nothing ever works out”; “What bad luck to get lung cancer”). Locus of control is a term used in reference to an individual’s sense of mastery or control over events. Those with internal locus of control tend to be more optimistic about their ability to deal with adversity even in the face of current diffi culties. Individuals with external locus of control may attribute feelings of powerlessness to an external source perceiving it as beyond his or her control.
5. Note cultural factors or religious beliefs that may contribute to how client is handling the situation. One’s values and beliefs may dictate gender roles, infl uence client’s belief in ability to manage situation, participate in decisionmaking, and direct own life.
6. Assess degree of mastery client has exhibited in life. Passive individual may have more diffi culty being assertive and standing up for rights.
7. Determine if there has been a change in relationships with significant other(s) (SO[s]). Conflict in the family, loss of a family member, or divorce can contribute to feelings of powerlessness and lack of ability to manage situation.
8. Note availability and use of resources. Client who has few options for assistance or who is not knowledgeable about how to use resources needs to be given information and assistance to know how and where to seek help.
9. Investigate caregiver practices to determine if they support client control and responsibility. 
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assess degree of powerlessness experienced by client:
1. Listen to statements client makes: “They don’t care”; “It won’t make any difference”; “Are you kidding?” Indicators of sense of powerlessness and hopelessness and need for specifi c interventions to provide sense of control over what is happening.
2. Note expressions that indicate “giving up,” such as “It won’t do any good.” May indicate suicidal intent, indicating need for immediate evaluation and interventions.
3. Note behavioral responses (verbal and nonverbal) including expressions of fear, interest or apathy, agitation, withdrawal. These responses can show depth of anxiety, feelings of powerlessness, and indicate need for intervention to help client begin to look at situation with some sense of hope.
4. Note lack of communication, fl at affect, and lack of eye contact. May indicate more severe state of mind, such as psychotic episode and need for immediate evaluation and treatment.
5. Identify the use of manipulative behavior and reactions of client and caregivers. Manipulation is used for management of powerlessness because of distrust of others, fear of intimacy, search for approval, and validation of sexuality.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To assist client to clarify needs relative to ability to meet them: 
1. Show concern for client as a person. 
2. Make time to listen to client’s perceptions and concerns and encourage questions.
3. Accept expressions of feelings, including anger andhopelessness. 
4. Avoid arguing or using logic with hopeless client. Client will not believe it can make a difference.
5. Deal with manipulative behavior by being straightforward and honest with your communication and letting client know that this is a better way to get needs met. Steps can be taken to recognize the behaviors and feelings and begin to change them. 
6. Express hope for the client. (There is always hope of something.)
7. Identify strengths and assets, and past coping strategies that were successful. Helps client to recognize own ability to deal with diffi cult situation.
8. Assist client to identify what he or she can do for self. Identify things the client can and cannot control. Accomplishing something can provide a sense of control and helps client understand that there are things he or she can manage. Accepting that some things cannot be controlled helps client to stop wasting efforts and refocus energy.
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    - To promote independence/reduce risk of sense of powerlessness:
1. Encourage client to maintain a sense of perspective about the situation. Discussing ways client can look at options and make decisions based on which ones will be best leads to the most effective solutions for situation.
2. Use client’s locus of control to develop individual plan of care (e.g., for client with internal control, encourage client to take control of own care; for those with external control, begin with small tasks and add, as tolerated). 
3. Develop contract with client specifying goals agreed on. Enhances commitment to plan, optimizing outcomes.
4. Treat expressed decisions and desires with respect. Avoid critical parenting behaviors and communications. Comments that are heard as critical or condescending will block communication and growth.
5. Provide client opportunities to control as many events as energy and restrictions of care permit. Promotes sense of control over situation and helps client begin to feel more confi dent about own ability to manage what is happening.
6. Discuss needs openly with client and set up agreed-on routines for meeting identifi ed needs. Minimizes use of manipulation.
7. Minimize rules and limit continuous observation to the degree that safety permits to provide sense of control for the client. 
8. Support client efforts to develop realistic steps to put plan into action, reach goals, and maintain expectations. 
9. Provide positive reinforcement for desired behaviors. 
10. Direct client’s thoughts beyond present state to future when appropriate. Focusing on possibilities in small steps can help the client see that there can be hope in small things each day.
11. Schedule frequent brief visits to let client know someone is interested and available.
12. Involve SO(s) in client care as appropriate. Personal involvement by supportive family members can help client see the possibilities for resolving problems related to feelings of powerlessness.
[Nursing Priority No. 5]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Encourage client to think productively and positively and to take responsibility for choosing own thoughts and reactions. Can enhance feelings of power and sense of positive self-esteem.
2. Instruct in and encourage use of anxiety and stress-reduction techniques. Providing information in different modalities allows better access and opportunity for increased understanding. People do not always hear every piece of information the fi rst time it is presented because of anxiety and inattention, so repetition helps to fi ll in the missedinformation.
3. Provide accurate verbal and written information about what is happening and discuss with client/SO(s). Repeat as often as necessary.
4. Assist client to set realistic goals for the future. Provides opportunity for client to decide what direction is desired and to gain confi dence from completion of each goal.
5. Assist client to learn and use assertive communication skills. Use of I-messages, active-listening, and problem-solving encourages client to be more in control of own life.
6. Refer to occupational therapist or vocational counselor, as indicated. Facilitates return to a productive role in whatever capacity possible for the individual.
7. Encourage client to think productively and positively and take responsibility for choosing own thoughts. Negative thinking can result in feelings of powerlessness, and learning to use positive thinking can reverse this pattern, promoting feelings of control and self-worth.
8. Model problem-solving process with client/SO(s). Outcome is more likely to be accepted when arrived at by all parties involved, and participating in win-win solutions promotes sense of self-worth.
9. Suggest client periodically review of own needs and goals. 
10. Refer to support groups for counseling or therapy, as appropriate. May need/desire additional assistance to resolve current problems, long-standing issues, or troubled relationships.
=====

