::Rape-Trauma Syndrome::

::Definition::
 Sustained maladaptive response to a forced, violent, sexual penetration against the victim’s will and consent. [Rape is not a sexual crime, but a crime of violence, and it is identified as sexual assault. Although attacks are most often directed toward women, men also may be victims.] 

::Action/Interventions::
  
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess trauma and individual reaction, noting length of time since occurrence of event:
1. Observe for and elicit information about physical injury and assess stress-related symptoms, such as numbness, headache, tightness in chest, nausea, and pounding heart. Indicators of degree of and reaction to trauma experienced by the client, which may occur immediately and in the days or weeks following the attack.
2. Identify psychological responses: anger, shock, acute anxiety, confusion, denial. Note laughter, crying, calm or agitated state, excited (hysterical) behavior, expressions of disbelief, and/or self-blame. 
3. Note signs of increasing anxiety (e.g., silence, stuttering, inability to sit still). Indicates need for immediate interventions to prevent panic reaction.
4. Determine degree of disorganization. Initially, the individual may be in shock and disbelief, which is a normal response to the incident. The person may respond by withdrawing and be unable to manage activities of daily living, especially when the incident was particularly brutal.
5. Identify whether incident has reactivated preexisting or coexisting situations (physical/psychological). Can affect how the client views the current trauma and exacerbate preexisting problems.
6. Ascertain cultural values or religious beliefs that may affect how client views incident, self, and expectations of SO/family reaction. Client may believe incident will bring shame on the family, blame self, or believe that family will blame client, thus affecting client’s ability to reach out to others for support.
7. Determine sexual orientation of the survivor. Heterosexual men/boys may believe that they are now gay (after being sexually assaulted) and need to be assured that is not true.
8. Determine disruptions in relationships (e.g., spouse/partner, family, friends, coworkers). Many women fi nd that they react to men in general in a different way, seeing them as reminders of the assault. Male survivors may withdraw entirely from sexual relations.
9. Identify development of phobic reactions to ordinary articles (e.g., knives, buildings) and situations (e.g., walking in groups of people, strangers ringing doorbell). 
10. Note degree of intrusive repetitive thoughts, sleep disturbances.
11. Assess degree of dysfunctional coping (e.g., use of alcohol, other drugs, suicidal/homicidal ideation, marked change in sexual behavior) in an attempt to cope with traumatic event. 

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to deal with situation that exists:
1. Explore own feelings (nurse/caregiver) regarding rape or incest issue prior to interacting with the client. Because the feelings related to these incidents are so pervasive, the individual involved in caregiving needs to recognize own biases to prevent imposing them on the client.

::Acute Phase::

1. Stay with the client, do not leave child unattended. During this phase, the client experiences a complete disruption of life as she or he has known it, and presence of caregiver may provide reassurance and sense of safety
2. Involve rape or sexual assault response team where available. Provide same-sex examiner when appropriate. Presence of the response team trained to collect evidence appropriately and sensitively provides assurance to the survivor that she or he is being taken care of. Client may react to someone who is the sex of the attacker, and use of a same-sex examiner communicates sensitivity to her or his feelings at this diffi cult time
3. Be sensitive to cultural factors that may affect specifi cs of examination process. For example, in some cultures, women cannot be examined without a male family member present. These issues need to be considered when treating the survivor.
4. Evaluate infant, child, or adolescent as dictated by age, sex, and developmental level. Age of the victim is an important consideration in deciding plan of care and appropriate interventions. Note: While underreported, it is believed that 1 in 6 men are sexually assaulted, and 1 in 6 boys will be sexually assaulted or abused before the age of 18.
5. Assist with documentation of incident for police or child protective services reports, maintain sequencing and collection of evidence (chain of evidence), label each specimen, and store and package properly. Protecting evidence is important to the judicial process when offender goes to trial. 
6. Provide environment in which client can talk freely about feelings and fears, including concerns about relationship with and response of SO(s), pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections.
7. Provide psychological support by listening and remaining with client. If client does not want to talk, accept silence. May indicate silent reaction or controlled style of dealing with the occurrence in which the individual contains his or her emotions, using all his or her energy to maintain composure.
8. Listen to and investigate physical complaints. Assist with medical treatments, as indicated. Emotional reactions may limit client’s ability to recognize physical injury.
9. Determine client’s ego strengths and assist client to use them in a positive way by acknowledging client’s ability to handle what is happening.
10. Identify support persons for this individual. The client’s partner can be important to her or his recovery by being patient and comforting. When partners talk through the incident, the relationship can be strengthened.

::Postacute Phase::

1. Allow the client to work through own kind of adjustment (may be withdrawn or unwilling to talk); do not force the issue, but be available, if needed. 
2. Listen for expressions of fear of crowds, men, being alone in home, and so forth. May reveal developing phobias. 
3. Discuss specific concerns and fears. Identify appropriate actions (e.g., diagnostic testing for pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections) and provide information, as indicated.
4. Include written instructions that are concise and clear regarding medical treatments, crisis support services, and so forth. Reinforces teaching, provides opportunity to deal with information at own pace. 

::Long-term Phase::

1.  Continue listening to expressions of concern. May need to continue to talk about the assault. Note persistence of somatic complaints (e.g., nausea, anorexia, insomnia, muscle tension, headache).
2. Permit free expression of feelings (may continue from the crisis phase). Refrain from rushing client through expressions of feelings and avoid reassuring inappropriately. Client may believe pain and/or anguish is misunderstood, and depression may limit responses.
3. Acknowledge reality of loss of self that existed before the incident. Assist client to move toward an acceptance of the potential for growth that exists within individual.
4. Continue to allow client to progress at own pace. The process of grieving is a very individual one, and each person needs to know that she or he can take whatever time needed to resolve feelings and move on with life.
5. Give “permission” to express/deal with anger at the perpetrator and situation in acceptable ways. Set limits on destructive behaviors. Facilitates resolution of feelings without diminishing self-concept.
6. Keep discussion on practical and emotional level rather than intellectualizing the experience, which allows client to avoid dealing with feelings.
7. Assist in dealing with ongoing concerns about and effects of the incident, such as court appearance, pregnancy, sexually transmitted infection, and relationship with SO(s). 
8. Provide for sensitive, trained counselors, considering individual needs. Male or female counselors may be best determined on an individual basis as counselor’s gender may be an issue for some clients, affecting ability to disclose.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    -  To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide information about what reactions client may expect during each phase. Let client know these are common reactions and phrase in neutral terms of “You may or may not experience, know, be aware of. . . .” Such information helps client anticipate and deal with reactions if they are experienced. Note: Be aware that although male rape perpetrators are usually heterosexual, the male victim may be concerned about his own sexuality and may exhibit a homophobic response.
2. Assist client to identify factors that may have created a vulnerable situation and that she or he may have power to change. While client needs to be assured that she or he is not to blame for incident, the circumstances of the incident need to be assessed to identify factors that are within the individual’s control to avoid a similar incident occurring.
3. Avoid making value judgments.
4. Discuss lifestyle changes client is contemplating and how they will contribute to recovery. Helps client evaluate appropriateness of plans and make decisions that will be helpful to eventual recovery.
5. Encourage psychiatric consultation if client is violent, inconsolable, or does not seem to be making an adjustment. May need intensive professional help to come to terms with the assault.
6. Refer to family/marital counseling, as indicated. 
7. Refer to NDs Powerlessness; ineffective Coping; Grieving; complicated Grieving; Anxiety; Fear. 

=====