::Readines For Enhanced Power::

::Definition::
 A pattern of participating knowingly in change for well-being, which can be strengthened.
 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To determine need/motivation for improvement:
1. Determine current situation and circumstances that client is experiencing, leading to desire to improve life. 
2. Ascertain motivation and expectations for change. 
3. Identify emotional climate in which client and relationships live and work. The emotional climate has a great impact between people. When a power differential exists in relationships, the atmosphere is largely determined by the person or people who have the power.
4. Identify client’s locus of control: internal (expressions of responsibility for self and ability to control outcomes) or external (expressions of lack of control over self and environment). Understanding locus of control can help client work toward positive, internal control as he or she develops ability to freely recognize and choose own actions.
5. Determine cultural factors/religious beliefs infl uencing client’s self-view. These factors can be strong determinants in individual’s ability to change and view self as powerful and may complicate growth process.
6. Assess degree of mastery client has exhibited in his or her life. Helps client understand how he or she has functioned in the past and what is needed to improve.
7. Note presence of family/signifi cant other (SO)(s) that can, or do, act as support systems for client. 
8. Determine whether client knows and/or uses assertiveness skills. Learning and enhancing these skills will help client to improve ability to take personal responsibility for own self and relationships with others.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist client to clarify needs relative to ability to improve
feelings of power:
1. Discuss needs and how client is meeting them at this time. 
2. Active-listen client’s perceptions and beliefs about how power can be gained in his or her life. 
3. Identify strengths, assets, and past coping strategies that were successful and can be built on to enhance feelings of control.
4. Discuss the importance of assuming personal responsibility for life and relationships. This skill requires one to be open to new ideas and experiences and different values and beliefs and to be inquisitive.
5. Assist client in identifying things client can and cannot control. Avoids wasting time on things that are not in the control of the client.
6. Treat expressed desires and decisions with respect. Avoid critical parenting expressions.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimum wellness, enhancing power (Teaching/
Discharge Considerations):
1. Assist client to set realistic goals for the future. 
2. Provide accurate verbal and written information about what is happening and discuss with client. Reinforces learning and promotes self-paced review.
3. Assist client to learn and use assertive communication skills. These techniques require practice, but as the client becomes more profi cient, he or she will help client to develop more effective relationships.
4. Use I-messages instead of You-messages. I-messages acknowledge ownership of what is said, while You-messages suggest that the other person is wrong or bad, fostering resentment and resistance instead of understanding and cooperation.
5. Discuss importance of paying attention to nonverbal communication. Messages are often confusing or misinterpreted when verbal and nonverbal communications are not congruent.
6. Help client learn to problem-solve differences. Promotes win-win solutions.
7. Instruct and encourage use of stress-reduction techniques. 
8. Refer to support groups or classes, as indicated (e.g., assertiveness training, effectiveness for women; “Be Your Best” training program).
=====

