::Readiness for Enhanced Organized Infant Behavior::

::Definition::
A pattern of modulation of the physiological and behavioral systems of functioning, which can be 
strengthened.

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess infant status and parental skill level:
1. Determine the infant's chronological and developmental age; note the length of gestation. 
2, Identify the infant's individual self-regulatory behaviors, such as suck, mouth, grasp, hand-to-mouth, face behaviors, foot clasp, brace, limb fl exion, trunk tuck, and boundary seeking. 
3. Observe for cues suggesting the presence of situations that may result in pain/discomfort. 
4. Evaluate level and appropriateness of environmental stimuli. 
5. Ascertain the parents' understanding of the infant's needs and abilities. 
6. Listen to the parents' perceptions of their capabilities to promote the infant's development 
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist parents to enhance infant's integration:
1. Review infant growth and development, pointing out current status and progressive expectations. 
2. Identify cues refl ecting infant stress. 
3. Discuss possible modifications of environmental stimuli, handling, activity schedule, sleep, and pain control needs based on the infant's behavioral cues. Stimulation that is properly timed and appropriate in complexity and intensity allows the infant to maintain a stable balance of his or her subsystems and enhances development.
4. Provide positive feedback for parental involvement in the caregiving process. The transfer of care from staff to parents progresses along a continuum as parents' confi -dence level increases and they are able to take on more responsibility.
5. Discuss use of skin-to-skin contact (kangaroo care [KC]), as appropriate. Research suggests KC may have a positive effect on infant development by enhancing neurophysiological organization, as well as an indirect effect by improving parental mood, perceptions, and interactive behavior.
6. Incorporate parents' observations and suggestions into the plan of care. This demonstrates value of and regard for parents' input and enhances the sense of ability to deal with situations.
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Learning Considerations):
1. Identify community resources (e.g., visiting nurse, home-care support, and childcare). 
2. Refer to support group or individual role model to facilitate adjustment to new roles/responsibilities.
3. Refer to additional NDs, such as readiness for enhanced family Coping. 
=========

