::Readiness For Enhanced Communication::

::Definition::
A pattern of exchanging information and ideaswith others, which can be strengthened.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess how client is managing communication/challenges:
1. Ascertain circumstances that result in a client's desire to improve communication. Many factors are involved in communication, and identifying specifi c needs/expectations helps in developing realistic goals and determining likelihood of success.
2. Evaluate mental status. Disorientation, acute or chronic confusion, or psychotic conditions may be affecting speech and the communication of thoughts, needs, and desires.
3. Determine the client's developmental level of speech and language comprehension. This provides baseline information for developing a plan for improvement.
4. Determine the ability to read and write preferred language. Evaluating grasp of language as well as musculoskeletal states, including manual dexterity (e.g., ability to hold a pen and write), provides information about the nature of client's situation. The educational plan can addresslanguage skills. Neuromuscular defi cits will require an individual program in order to improve.
5. Determine country of origin, dominant language, whether client is recent immigrant, and what cultural/ethnic group the client identifi es with. A recent immigrant may identify with home country and its people, language, beliefs, and healthcare practices, thus affecting language skills and the ability to improve interactions in a new country.
6. Ascertain if an interpreter is needed/desired. The law mandates that interpretation services be made available. A  trained, professional interpreter who translates precisely and possesses a basic understanding of medical terminology and healthcare ethics is preferred to enhance client and provider satisfaction.
7. Determine comfort level in expression of feelings and concepts in nonproficient language. Concern about language skills can impact their perception of their own ability to communicate.
8. Note any physical barriers to effective communication (e.g., talking tracheostomy or wired jaws) or physiological or neurological conditions (e.g., severe shortness of breath, neuromuscular weakness, stroke, brain trauma, hearing impairment, cleft palate, and facial trauma). The client may be dealingwith speech/language comprehension diffi culties or have voice production problems (pitch, loudness, or quality)that call attention to voice rather than what the speaker is saying. These barriers may need to be addressed to enable the client to improve communication skills.
9. Clarify the meaning of words used by the client to describe important aspects of life and health/well- being (e.g., pain, sorrow, or anxiety). Words can easily be misinterpreted when the sender and receiver have different ideas about their meanings. Restating what one has heard can clarify whether an expressed statement has been correctly understood or misinterpreted.
10. Determine the presence of emotional lability (e.g., anger outbursts) and the frequency of unstable behaviors. Emotional and psychiatric issues can affect communication and interfere with understanding.
11. Evaluate congruency of verbal and nonverbal messages. Communication is enhanced when verbal and nonverbal messages are congruent.
12. Evaluate need or desire for pictures or written communications and instructions as part of the treatment plan. Alternative methods of communication can help the client feel understood and promote feelings of satisfaction with interaction.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To improve the client's ability to communicate thoughts, needs,
and ideas:
1. Maintain a calm, unhurried manner. Provide suffi cient time for the client to respond. An atmosphere in which the client is free to speak without fear of criticism provides the opportunity to explore all the issues involved in making decisions to improve communication skills.
2. Pay attention to the speaker. Be an active listener. The use of active- listening communicates acceptance and respect for the client, establishing trust and promoting openness and honest expression. It communicates a belief that the client is a capable and competent person.
3. Sit down, maintain eye contact as culturally appropriate, preferably at client's level, and spend time with the client. This conveys a message that the nurse has time and interest in communicating.
4. Observe body language, eye movements, and behavioral cues. This may reveal unspoken concerns; for example, when pain is present, the client may react with tears, grimacing, stiff posture, turning away, or angry outbursts.
5. Help the client identify and learn to avoid the use of nontherapeutic communication. These barriers are recognized as detriments to open communication, and learning to avoid them maximizes the effectiveness of communication between client and others.
6. Obtain an interpreter with language or signing abilities, as needed. This may be needed to enhance understanding of words and language concepts or to ascertain that interpretation of communication is accurate.
7. Suggest the use of computer/tablet, pad and pencil, slate board, or letter/picture board when interacting or attempting to interface in new situations. When the client has physical impairments that challenge verbal communication, an alternate means can provide clear concepts that are understandable to both parties.
8. Obtain or provide access to a voice- enabled computer, when indicated. Use of these devices may be more helpful when communication challenges are long- standing and/or when client is used to working with them.
9. Respect the client's cultural communication needs. Culture can dictate beliefs of what is normal or abnormal (i.e., in some cultures, eye- to- eye contact is considered disrespectful, impolite, or an invasion of privacy; silence and tone of voice have various meanings, and slang words can cause confusion).
10. Encourage the use of glasses, hearing aids, dentures, or electronic speech devices, as needed. These devices maximize sensory perception or speech formation and can improve understanding and enhance speech patterns.
11. Reduce distractions and background noises (e.g., close the door and turn down the radio or TV). A distracting environment can interfere with communication, limiting attention to tasks and making speech and communication more diffi cult. Reducing noise can help both parties hear clearly, thus improving understanding.
12. Associate words with objects— using gestures, repetition, and redundancy— and point to objects or demonstrate desired actions if communication requires visual aids. The speaker's own body language can be used to enhance the client's understanding.
13. Use confrontation skills carefully, when appropriate, within an established nurse- client relationship. This can be used to clarify discrepancies between verbal and nonverbal cues, enabling the client to look at areas that may require change.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    -  To promote optimum communication:
1. Discuss with family/significant other (SO) and other caregivers effective ways in which the client communicates. Identifying positive aspects of current communication skills enables family members and other caregivers to learn and move forward in desire to enhance ways of interacting.
2. Encourage client/SO(s) to familiarize themselves with and use new communication technologies. This enhances family relationships and promotes self- esteem for all members as they are able to communicate regardless of the problems (e.g., progressive disorder) that could interfere with the ability to interact.
3. Reinforce client/SO(s) learning and using therapeutic communication skills of acknowledgment, active- listening, and I- messages. This improves general communication skills, emphasizes acceptance, and conveys respect, enabling family relationships to improve.
4. Refer to appropriate resources (e.g., speech therapist, language classes, individual/family and/or psychiatric counseling). This may be needed to help overcome challenges as the family reaches toward a desired goal of enhanced communication.
=====
