::Readiness For Enhanced Relationship::

::Definition::
 A pattern of mutual partnership to provide for each other’s needs, which can be strengthened.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess current situation and determine needs: 
1. Determine makeup of family (e.g., includes couple only, parents and children, older and younger members). Life changes, such as developmental, situational, health-illness, can affect relationship between partners and require readjustment and thinking of ways to enhance situation.
2. Discuss client’s perception of needs and how partner sees desire to improve relationship. 
3. Identify use of effective communication skills. May need to improve understanding of words partners use in discussion of sensitive subjects.
4. Help client identify thoughts and feelings when starting a discussion with partner. A system of thinking (referred to as a paradigm) forms the basis for how we look at and experience life and determines how we perceive our world, forms the basis for our reality, and exists below our level of consciousness.
5. Ask partners how they deal with confl ict. Since conflict is a normal, natural, and inevitable part of life, this needs to be acknowledged, and individuals need to learn how to deal with it effectively.
6. Ascertain client’s view of sexual aspects of relationship. Changes that occur with aging or medical conditions, such as a hysterectomy or erectile dysfunction, can affect the relationship and need specifi c interventions to resolve.
7. Identify cultural factors relating to individual’s view of role in relationship.
8. Discuss how family as a whole functions. Interrelationships with members of the family, personal and family history, and situational dynamics can improve the functioning of the whole family.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist the client to enhance existing situation:
1. Maintain positive attitude toward client. Promotes safe relationship in which client can feel free to speak openly and plan for a positive future.
2. Have couple discuss paradigms that they have become aware of in own thinking that interfere with relationship. These beliefs exist below our conscious mind, infl uencing our behavior and whether we see the world in negative or positive ways.
3. Determine how each person views himself or herself (i.e., a positive or negative person). One’s self-image infl uences behavior and how one relates to others. When emotional needs are met, individuals relate to others in positive ways, while unmet needs result in low self-image and insecurity.
4. Discuss the skills of emotional intelligence that are important for maintaining positive relationships. This is the ability to recognize and effectively control our own emotions and to recognize the emotions of others.
5. Help couple to recognize that surface symptoms of dysfunctional relationships are not the problems that need to be dealt with. Underlying emotions infl uence our behaviors, and individuals often are not aware of them and continue to deal with the superfi cial confl icts.
6. Explore individual’s emotional needs. Relationships are often motivated by unconscious desires to gain acceptance, recognition, sense of being cared about or valued.
7. Note client’s awareness of nonverbal communications. Body language, tone of voice, a roll of the eyes, or subtle movements convey strong messages, positive or negative, that need to be discussed and clarifi ed.
8. Discuss effective conflict-resolution skills. People tend to be afraid of confl ict because effective ways to deal with it have not been learned, and it often ends in a lose-lose situation.
9. Encourage client to remain calm and focused regardless of circumstances. Maintaining a calm demeanor helps individual to be able to think more clearly and be more rational in dealing with situation.
10. Recommend cross-checking or verifying what listener believes speaker said. Clarifi es communication and allows speaker to respond or correct perception of listener as needed.
11. Help partners to learn win-win method of confl ict resolution. Although confl ict can damage a relationship, learning to listen to each other’s needs can assist partners to arrive at mutually acceptable solutions.
12. Role-play ways to defuse arguments and repair injured feelings. Provides a realistic situation where each person can identify own and partner’s view and practice new ways of interacting.
13. Provide open environment for partners to discuss sexual concerns and questions.
14. Discuss nonblameful self-disclosure when having a dialogue. Partners take turns talking about own needs and feelings without blaming the other, resulting in being able to fi nd a solution in a climate of mutual consideration and respect.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    -  Nursing Priority No. 3.
 To promote optimal functioning (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide information for partners, using bibliotherapy and appropriate Web sites.
2. Encourage couple to use humor and playfulness in their relationship. Sharing laughter and enjoying life helps weather diffi cult times.
3. Discuss the importance of being an empathic, understanding, and nonjudgmental listener when either partner has a problem. 
4. Help individuals to learn to use the skill of active-listening. This avoids giving advice and helps other person to fi nd own solution, enhancing self-esteem.
5. Refer to support groups, classes on assertiveness, parenting, as indicated by individual needs. 
6. Include family members in discussions as needed. 
7. Refer for care as indicated by psychological or physical concerns of either individual. 

=====