::Readiness For Enhanced Nutrition::

::Definition::
 A pattern of nutrient intake that is sufficient for meeting metabolic needs and can be strengthened. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To determine current nutritional status and eating patterns:
1. Review client’s knowledge of current nutritional needs and ways client is meeting these needs. Provides baseline for further teaching and interventions.
2. Assess eating patterns and food and fl uid choices in relation to any health risk factors and health goals. Helps to identify specifi c strengths and weaknesses that can be addressed.
3. Verify that age-related and developmental needs are met. These factors are constantly presented throughout the life span, although differing for each age group. For example, older adults need same nutrients as younger adults, but in smaller amounts, and with attention to certain components, such as calcium, fi ber, vitamins, protein, and water. Infants/children require small meals and constant attention to needed nutrients for proper growth and development while dealing with child’s food preferences and eating habits.
4. Evaluate influence of cultural or religious factors to determine what client considers to be normal dietary practices, as well as to identify food preferences and restrictions, and eating patterns that can be strengthened and/or altered, if indicated.
5. Assess how client perceives food, food preparation, and the act of eating to determine client’s feelings and emotions regarding food and self-image.
6. Ascertain occurrence of, or potential for, negative feedback from signifi cant other (SO)(s). May reveal control issues that could impact client’s commitment to change.
7. Determine patterns of hunger and satiety. Helps identify strengths and weaknesses in eating patterns and potential for change (e.g., person predisposed to weight gain may need a different time for a big meal than evening or need to learn what foods reinforce feelings of satisfaction).
8. Assess client’s ability to safely store and prepare foods to determine if health information or resources might be needed.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client/SO(s) to develop plan to meet individual needs:
1. Determine motivation and expectation for change. Motivation to improve and high expectations can encourage client to make changes that will improve his or her life. Client may actually be satisfi ed with current nutritional state and eating behaviors, or may be changing some aspect of food intake or preparation in response to new dietary information or change in health status.
2. Assist in obtaining and review results of individual testing (e.g., weight/height, body fat percent, lipids, glucose, complete blood count, total protein) to determine that client is healthy and/or identify dietary changes that may be helpful in attaining health goals.
3. Encourage client’s beneficial eating patterns/habits (e.g., controlling portion size, eating regular meals, reducing highfat or fast-food intake, following specifi c dietary program, drinking water and healthy beverages). Positive feedback promotes continuation of healthy lifestyle habits and new behaviors.
4. Discuss use of nonfood rewards. 
5. Provide instruction and reinforce information regarding special needs. Enhances decision-making process and promotes responsibility for meeting own needs.
6. Encourage reading of food labels and instruct in meaning of labeling, as indicated, to assist client/SO(s) in making healthful choices.
7. Consult with, or refer to, dietitian or physician, as indicated. Client/SO(s) may benefit from advice regarding specifi c nutrition and dietary issues or may require regular follow-up to determine that needs are being met when a medically prescribed program is to be followed.
8. Develop a system for self-monitoring to provide a sense of control and enable the client to follow own progress and assist in making choices.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimum wellness:
1. Review individual risk factors and provide additional information and response to concerns. Assists the client with motivation and decision-making.
2. Reinforces learning, allows client to progress at own pace, and encourages client to be responsible for own learning. Provide bibliotherapy and help client/SO(s) identify and evaluate resources they can access on their own. When referencing the Internet or nontraditional, unproven resources, the individual must exercise some restraint and determine the reliability of the source/information before acting on it.
3. Encourage variety and moderation in dietary plan to decrease boredom and encourage client in efforts to make healthy choices about eating and food.
4. Discuss use of nutritional supplements, over-the-counter, and herbal products. Confusion may exist regarding the need for and use of these products in a balanced dietary regimen.
5. Assist client to identify and access community resources when indicated. May benefi t from assistance such as Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Women Infant and Children (WIC) program, budget counseling, Meals on Wheels, community food banks, and/or other assistance programs.
=====

