::Readiness for Enhanced Breastfeeding::

::Definition::
A pattern of feeding milk from the breasts to an 
infant or child, which may be strengthened.

::Actions/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To determine individual learning needs: 
1 Assess the mother's desires/plan for feeding infant. This provides information for developing a plan of care.
2 Assess the mother's knowledge and previous experience with 
breastfeeding. 
3 Identify cultural beliefs/practices regarding lactation, letdown techniques, and maternal food preferences. In Western 
cultures, the breast has taken on a sexual connotation, 
and some mothers may be embarrassed to breastfeed. 
While breastfeeding may be accepted, in some cultures, 
certain beliefs may affect specifi c feeding practices (e.g., 
in Mexican-American, Navajo, Filipino, and Vietnamese 
cultures, colostrum is not offered to the newborn; breastfeeding begins only after the milk fl ow is established).
4 Note myths/misunderstandings, especially in teenage mothers, who are more likely to have limited knowledge, as well 
as concerns about body image issues
5 Evaluate the effectiveness of current breastfeeding efforts. 
6 Determine the support systems available to the mother/
family. In addition to caring healthcare providers, the 
infant's father and maternal grandmother are important 
factors in whether breastfeeding is successful
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To promote effective breastfeeding behaviors: 
1. Initiate breastfeeding within the first hour after birth.Throughout the first 2 hr after birth, the infant is usually alert and ready to nurse. Early feedings are of great benefi t to the mother and the infant because oxytocin release is stimulated, helping to expel the placenta and prevent excessive maternal blood loss; the infant receives the immunological protection of colostrum, peristalsis is stimulated, lactation is accelerated, and maternal–infant bonding is enhanced.
2. Encourage skin-to-skin contact. Place the infant on the mother's stomach, skin-to-skin, after delivery. Studies show that early skin-to-skin mother-infant contact is correlated with exclusive breastfeeding while in the hospital.
3. Demonstrate asymmetric latch aiming infant ' s lower lip as far from the base of the nipple as possible, then bringing the infant's chin and lower jaw in contact with the breast while the mouth is wide open and before the upper lip touches the breast. This position allows the infant to use both tongue and jaw more effectively to obtain milk from the breast.
4. Demonstrate how to support and position the infant (e.g., infant sling or nursing footstool or pillows). 
5. Observe the mother's return demonstration. This provides practice and the opportunity to correct misunderstandings and add additional information to promote the optimal experience for breastfeeding.
6. Keep the infant with the mother for unrestricted breastfeeding duration and frequency.
7. Encourage the mother to follow a well-balanced diet containing an extra 500 calories/day, continue her prenatal vitamins, and drink at least 2,000 to 3,000 mL of fl uid/day. There is an increased need for maternal energy, protein, minerals, and vitamins, as well as increased fl uid intake during lactation.
8. Provide information as needed about early infant feeding cues (e.g., rooting, lip smacking, sucking on fi ngers/hand) versus the late cue of crying. Early recognition of infant hunger promotes a timely/more rewarding feeding experience for the infant and the mother.
9. Promote peer counseling for teen mothers. This provides a positive role model that the teen can relate to and feel comfortable with discussing concerns/feelings
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
    -  To enhance optimum wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Provide for follow-up contact or home visit 48 hr after discharge, as indicated or desired; repeat visits as necessary to provide support and assist with problem solving.
2. Recommend monitoring the number of infant's wet diapers. Some pediatric care providers suggest that six wet diapers in 24 hr indicate adequate hydration.
3. Encourage the mother/other family members to express feelings/concerns, and active-listen to determine the nature of concerns.
4. Educate the father/significant other (SO) about the benefi ts of breastfeeding and how to manage common lactation challenges. Enlisting the support of the father/SO is associated with a higher ratio of successful breastfeeding at 6 mo.
5. Review techniques for expression (breast pumping) and storage of breast milk to help sustain breastfeeding activity.
6. Problem-solve return-to-work issues or periodic infant care requiring bottle/supplemental feeding. 
 - Recommend using expressed breast milk instead of formula or at least partial breastfeeding for as long as mother and child are satisfi ed. 
7. Explain changes in feeding needs/frequency. Growth spurts require increased intake/more feedings by infant.
8. Review normal nursing behaviors of older breastfeeding infants/toddlers. 
9. Discuss the importance of delaying the introduction of solid foods until the infant is at least 4 mo, preferably 6 mo old. (Note: This is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization.)
10. Recommend avoidance of specifi c medications or substances (e.g., estrogen-containing contraceptives, bromocriptine, nicotine, and alcohol) that are known to decrease milk supply. Note: Small amounts of alcohol have not been shown to be detrimental.
11. Emphasize the importance of the client notifying healthcare providers, dentists, and pharmacists of breastfeeding status. 
12. Problem-solve return-to-work issues or periodic infant care requiring bottle or supplemental feeding. This enables mothers who need or desire to return to work (for economic or personal reasons) or who simply want to attend activities without the infant to deal with these issues, thus allowing more freedom while maintaining adequate breastfeeding.
13. Refer to support groups, such as the La Leche League, as indicated. Provide the mother with the phone number of a support person or group prior to leaving the hospital. 
14. Refer to ND ineffective Breastfeeding for more specifi c information addressing challenges to breastfeeding, asappropriate.
=========

