::Readiness For Enhanced Sleep::

::Definition::
 A pattern of natural, periodic suspension of relative consciousness to provide rest and sustain a desired lifestyle, which can be strengthened.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To determine motivation for continued growth:
1. Listen to client’s reports of sleep quantity and quality. Determine client’s/signifi cant other’s (SO’s) perception of adequate sleep. Reveals client’s experience and expectations. Provides opportunity to address misconceptions or unrealistic expectations and plan for interventions.
2. Observe and/or obtain feedback from client/SO(s) regarding usual bedtime, desired rituals and routines, number of hours of sleep, time of arising, and environmental needs to determine usual sleep pattern and provide comparative baseline for improvements.
3. Ascertain motivation and expectation for change. 
4. Note client report of potential for alteration of habitual sleep time (e.g., change of work pattern, rotating shifts) or change in normal bedtime (e.g., hospitalization). Helps identify circumstances that are known to interrupt sleep patterns and that could disrupt the person’s biological rhythms.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to enhance sleep/rest:
1. Review client’s usual bedtime rituals, routines, and sleep environment needs. Provides information on client’s management of the situation and identifi es areas that might be modifi ed when the need arises.
2. Implement effective age-appropriate bedtime rituals for infant/child (e.g., soothing bath, rocking, story reading, cuddling, favorite blanket or toy). Rituals can enhance ability to fall asleep, reinforce that bed is a place to sleep, and promote sense of security for child.
3. Provide quiet environment and comfort measures (e.g., back rub, washing hands and face, cleaning and straightening sheets). Promotes relaxation and readiness for sleep.
4. Arrange care to provide for uninterrupted periods for rest. Explain necessity of disturbances for monitoring vital signs and/or other care when client is hospitalized. Do as much care as possible without waking client during night. Allows for longer periods of uninterrupted sleep, especially during night.
5. Discuss dietary matters, such as limiting intake of chocolate and caffeine or alcoholic beverages (especially prior to bedtime), which are substances known to impair falling or staying asleep. Note: Use of alcohol at bedtime may help individual initially fall asleep, but ensuing sleep is then fragmented. 
6. Suggest limiting fluid intake in evening if nocturia or bedwetting is a problem to reduce need for nighttime elimination.
7. Recommend appropriate changes to usual bedtime rituals. Explore use of warm bath, comfortable room temperature, use of soothing music, favorite calming TV show. Nonpharmaceutical aids can enhance falling asleep.
8. Assist client in use of necessary equipment, instructing as necessary. Client may use oxygen or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) system to improve sleep/rest if hypoxia or sleep apnea is diagnosed.
9. Investigate use of sleep mask, darkening shades or curtains, earplugs, low-level background (“white”) noise. Aids in blocking out light and disturbing noise.
10. Recommend continuing same schedule for sleep throughout week—including days off. Maintaining same sleep-wake pattern helps sustain biological rhythms.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimum sleep and wellness:
1. Assure client that occasional sleeplessness should not threaten health. Knowledge that occasional insomnia is universal and usually not harmful may promote relaxation and relief from worry.
2. Encourage regular exercise during the day to aid in stress control and release of energy. Note: Exercise at bedtime may stimulate rather than relax client and actually interfere with sleep.
3. Address sleep management techniques that may be useful during stressful conditions or lifestyle changes (e.g., pregnancy, new baby, menopause, medical procedures, new job, moving, change in relationship, grief). 
4. Advise using barbiturates and/or other sleeping medications sparingly. These medications, while useful for promoting sleep in the short term, can interfere with REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.

=====