::Readiness For Enhanced Spiritual Well-Being::

::Definition::
 A pattern of experiencing and integrating meaning and purpose in life through connectedness with self, others, art, music, literature, nature, and/or a power greater than oneself, which can be strengthened.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To determine spiritual state/motivation for growth:
1. Ascertain client’s perception of current state and degree of connectedness and expectations. Provides insight into where client is currently and what his or her hopes for the future may be.
2. Identify motivation and expectations for change. 
3. Review spiritual and religious history, activities, rituals, and frequency of participation. Provides basis to build on for growth or change.
4. Determine influence of cultural beliefs or values. Most individuals are strongly infl uenced by the spiritual or religious orientation of their family of origin, which can be a major determinate for client’s choice of activities and receptiveness to various options.
5. Determine relational values of support systems to one’s spiritual centeredness. The client’s family may have differing beliefs from those espoused by the individual that may be a source of confl ict for the client. Comfort can be gained when family and friends share client’s beliefs and support search for spiritual knowledge.
6. Explore meaning or interpretation and relationship of spirituality, life, death, and illness to life’s journey. Identifying the meaning of these issues is helpful for the client to use the information in forming a belief system that will enable him or her to move forward and live life to the fullest. 
7. Clarify the meaning of one’s spiritual beliefs or religious practice and rituals to daily living. Discussing these issues allows client to explore spiritual needs and decide what fi ts own view of the world to enhance life.
8. Explore ways that spirituality or religious practices have affected one’s life and given meaning and value to daily living. Note consequences as well as benefi ts. Understanding that there is a difference between spirituality and religion and how each can be useful will help client begin to view the information in a new way.
9. Discuss life’s or God’s plan (when this is the person’s belief) for the individual, if client desires. Helpful in determining individual goals and choosing specifi c options.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to integrate values and beliefs to achieve a sense of wholeness and optimum balance in daily living: 
1. Explore ways beliefs give meaning and value to daily living. As client develops understanding of these issues, the beliefs will provide support for dealing with current and future concerns.
2. Clarify reality and appropriateness of client’s self-perceptions and expectations. Necessary to provide fi rm foundation for growth.
3. Discuss the importance and value of connections to one’s daily life. The contact that one has with others maintains a feeling of belonging and connection and promotes feelings of wholeness and well-being.
4. Identify ways to achieve connectedness or harmony with self, others, nature, higher power (e.g., meditation, prayer, talking or sharing oneself with others; being out in nature, gardening, walking; attending religious activities). This is a highly individual and personal decision, and no action is too trivial to be considered.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To enhance personal growth and wellness:
1. Encourage client to take time to be introspective in the search for peace and harmony. Finding peace within oneself will carry over to relationships with others and own outlook on life.
2. Discuss use of relaxation or meditative activities (e.g., yoga, tai chi, prayer). Helpful in promoting general well-being and sense of connectedness with self, nature, or spiritual power.
3. Suggest attendance or involvement in dream-sharing group to develop and enhance learning of the characteristics of spiritual awareness and facilitate the individual’s growth.
4. Identify ways for spiritual or religious expression. There are multiple options for enhancing spirituality through connectedness with self/others (e.g., volunteering time to community projects, mentoring, singing in the choir, painting, spiritual writings).
5. Encourage participation in desired religious activities, contact with minister or spiritual advisor. Validating own beliefs in an external way can provide support and strengthen the inner self.
6. Discuss and role play, as necessary, ways to deal with alternative view or confl ict that may occur with family/signifi cant other(s) (SO[s]), society or cultural group. Provides opportunity to try out different behaviors in a safe environment and be prepared for potential eventualities.
7. Provide bibliotherapy, list of relevant resources (e.g., study groups, parish nurse, poetry society), and possible Web sites for later reference or self-paced learning and ongoing support.
=====

