::Readiness For Enhanced Self-Concept::

::Definition::
 A pattern of perceptions or ideas about the self, which can be strengthened.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess current situation and desire for improvement:
1. Determine current status of individual’s belief about self. Self-concept consists of the physical self (body image), the personal self (identity), and self-esteem. Information about client’s current thinking about self provides a beginning for making changes to improve self.
2. Determine availability and quality of family/signifi cant other(s) (SO[s]) support. Presence of supportive people who refl ect positive attitudes regarding the individual promotes a positive sense of self.
3. Identify family dynamics—present and past. Self-esteem begins in early childhood and is infl uenced by perceptions of how the individual is viewed by SOs. Provides information about family functioning that will help to develop plan of care for enhancing client’s self-concept.
4. Note willingness to seek assistance and motivation for change. Individuals who have a sense of their own selfimage and are willing to look at themselves realistically will be able to progress in the desire to improve.
5. Determine client’s concept of self in relation to cultural or religious ideals and beliefs. Cultural characteristics are learned in the family of origin and shape how the individual views self.
6. Observe nonverbal behaviors and note congruence with verbal expressions. Discuss cultural meanings of nonverbal communication. Incongruencies between verbal and nonverbal communication require clarifi cation. Interpretation of nonverbal expressions is culturally determined and needs to be clarifi ed to avoid misinterpretation.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To facilitate personal growth:
1. Develop therapeutic relationship. Be attentive, maintain open communication, use skills of active-listening and I-messages. Promotes trusting situation in which client is free to be open and honest with self and others.
2. Validate client’s communication, provide encouragement for efforts. 
3. Accept client’s perceptions or view of current status. Provides opportunity for client to develop realistic plan for improving self-concept, while feeling safe in existing view of self.
4. Be aware that people are not designed to be rational in their thinking. Individuals must seek information, choosing to learn, and to think rather than merely to accept or react in order to have respect for self, facts, and honesty and to develop positive self-esteem.
5. Discuss client perception of self, confronting misconceptions and identifying negative self-talk. Address distortions in thinking, such as self-referencing (beliefs that others are focusing on individual’s weaknesses or limitations); filtering (focusing on negative and ignoring positive); catastrophizing (expecting the worst outcomes). Addressing these issues openly allows client to identify things that may negatively affect self-esteem and provides opportunity for change.
6. Have client review current and past successes and strengths. Emphasizes fact that client is and has been successful in many actions taken.
7. Use positive I-messages rather than praise. Praise is a form of external control, coming from outside sources, whereas I-messages allow the client to develop internal sense of self-esteem.
8. Discuss what behavior does for client (positive intention). Ask what options are available to the client/SO(s). Encourages thinking about what inner motivations are and what actions can be taken to enhance self-esteem.
9. Provide reinforcement for progress noted. Positive words of encouragement support development of effective coping behaviors.
10. Encourage client to progress at own rate. Adaptation to a change in self-concept depends on its significance to the individual and disruption to lifestyle.
11. Involve in activities or exercise program of choice, promote socialization. Enhances sense of well-being and can help to energize client.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote optimum sense of self-worth and happiness:
1. Assist client to identify goals that are personally achievable. Provide positive feedback for verbal and behavioral indications of improved self-view. Increases likelihood of success and commitment to change.
2. Refer to vocational or employment counselor, educational resources, as appropriate. Assists with improving development of social or vocational skills.
3. Encourage participation in classes, activities, or hobbies that client enjoys or would like to experience. Provides opportunity for learning new information and skills that can enhance feelings of success, improving self-esteem.
4. Reinforce that current decision to improve self-concept is ongoing. Continued work and support are necessary to sustain behavior changes and personal growth.
5. Discuss ways to develop optimism. Optimism is a key ingredient in happiness and can be learned.
6. Suggest assertiveness training classes. Enhances ability to interact with others and develop more effective relationships, enhancing one’s self-concept.
7. Emphasize importance of grooming and personal hygiene and assist in developing skills to improve appearance and dress for success as needed. Looking one’s best improves sense of self-esteem, and presenting a positive appearance enhances how others see one.

=====