::Relocation Stress Syndrome And Risk For Relocation Stress Syndrome::

::Definition::
 - Relocation Stress Syndrome: Physiological and/ or psychosocial disturbance following transfer from one environment to another.
 - Risk For Relocation Stress Syndrome: Susceptible to physiological and/or psychosocial disturbance following transfer from one environment to another, which compromise health. 
 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Determine situation or cause for relocation (e.g., planned move for new job; deployment or returning from military duty; loss of home or community due to natural or man-made disaster such as fi re, earthquake, fl ood, war or act of terror; older adult unable to care for self, caregiver burnout; change in marital or health status). Infl uences needs and choice of interventions.
2. Determine physical and emotional health status. Stress associated with a move, even if desired, can cause or exacerbate health problems.
3. Note client’s age, developmental level, role in family. Age and position in life cycle make a difference in the impact of issues involved in relocating. For example, a child can be traumatized by transfer to new school/loss of peers; elderly persons may be affected by loss of long-term home, neighborhood setting, and support persons.
4. Ascertain if client participated in the decision to relocate and perceptions about change(s) and expectations for the future. Decision may have been made without client’s input or understanding of event or consequences, which can impact adjustment.
5. Note whether relocation will be temporary (e.g., extended care for rehabilitation therapies, moving in with family while house is being repaired after fi re) or long term or permanent (e.g., move from home of many years; placement in retirement center or long-term care facility). Client may be willing to relocate on temporary basis, seeing it as step to health and independence, but may view long-term placement as unbearable loss.
6. Identify cultural and/or religious concerns or confl icts that may affect client’s coping or impact social interactions and expectations. For example, client’s cultural norm may be that elders are cared for by family—not placed in a facility—causing client to feel abandoned; or individual may be required to defer to family decision maker and feel powerless in determining own destiny.
7. Note ethnic ties and primary language spoken and read. Obtain interpreter where appropriate. Affects client, signifi - cant other(s) (SO[s]), and healthcare providers who must try to reduce the client’s feelings of alienation, while communicating with client of another primary language, or client who is displaced from cultural attachments.
8. Monitor behavior, noting presence of anxiety, suspiciousness or paranoia, irritability, defensiveness. Compare with SO’s/staff’s description of customary responses. Move may temporarily exacerbate mental deterioration (cognitive inaccessibility) and impair communication (social inaccessibility).
9.  Determine involvement of family/SO(s). Note availability and use of support systems and resources.
10. Identify issues of safety that may be involved, such as diffi - culty adjusting to new environment (e.g., navigating streets or choosing correct bus; locating dining hall or bathroom in facility), concerns of elopement or running away.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to deal with situation/changes or to prevent/minimize adverse response to change : 
1. Collaborate in treatment of underlying conditions (e.g., chronic confusional states, brain injury, post-trauma rehabilitation) and physical stress symptoms that are potentially exacerbating relocation stress or that may affect the length of time that relocation is required.
2. Anticipate and address feelings of distress and grieving in family/caregivers when placing loved one in a different environment (e.g., nursing home, foster care). Support and referrals may be needed to help SOs in practical issues and adjustment.
3. Begin relocation planning with client and SO(s) as early as possible. Provide support and advocate for client who is unable to participate in decisions. Having a well-organized plan for move with support and advocacy may reduce anxiety.
4. Allow as much time as possible for move preparation and provide information and support in planning.
5. Discuss relocation or move with child, providing information aimed at level of understanding and interest. Child lacks ability to put problem into perspective, so minor mishap may seem catastrophic, and child is more vulnerable to stress because he or she has less control over environment than most adults.
6. Avoid moving adolescent in middle of school year when possible. Adolescent is vulnerable to emotional, social, and cognitive dysfunction because of the great importance of peer group and loss of friends and social standing caused by relocation.
7. Support self-responsibility and coping strategies to foster sense of control and self-worth.
8. Suggest contact with someone (friend, family, business associate) who has been to or lived in new area where move is being planned to absorb some of his or her experience and knowledge.
9. Encourage free expression of feelings about reason for relocation, including venting of anger; grief; loss of personal space, belongings, or friends; financial strains; powerlessness; and so forth. Acknowledge reality of situation and maintain hopeful attitude regarding move/change. Refer to NDs relating to client’s particular situation (e.g., Grieving; ineffective Coping) for additional interventions. 
10. Identify strengths and successful coping behaviors the individual has used previously. Incorporating these into problem-solving builds on past successes. 
11. Encourage client to maintain contact with friends (e.g., telephone, e-mail, video or audio tapes, arranged visits) to reduce sense of isolation.
12. Orient to surroundings and schedules. Introduce to neighbors, staff members, roommate, or residents. Provide clear, honest information about actions and events.
13. Encourage individual/family to personalize area with pictures, own belongings, as possible and appropriate. Enhances sense of belonging and creates personal space.
14. Determine client’s usual schedule of activities and incorporate into routine as possible. Reinforces sense of importance of individual.
15. Take practical steps to alleviate stress for child. Encourage parents to walk with child to school or rehearse boarding the school bus, visit new classroom, contact friends child left behind, drive past places of interest to child, fi nd a safe play place, unpack child’s favorite toys, invite neighborhood children to a get-acquainted party, and so forth. Helps child to maintain ties and develop new ones, thus reducing sense of loss and shifting focus to the future.
16. Introduce planned diversional activities, such as movies, meals with new acquaintances, art therapy, music, religious activities. Involvement increases opportunity to interact with others, decreasing isolation.
17. Place client with dementia in private room in facility, if appropriate, and include SO(s)/family in care activities, mealtimes, especially early in transition stage. Keeping client secluded may be needed under some circumstances (e.g., advanced Alzheimer’s disease with fear or aggressive reactions) to decrease the client’s stress reactions to new environment.
18. Encourage hugging and use of touch unless client prefers to abstain from hugging, is paranoid, or agitated at the moment. Human connection reaffi rms acceptance of individual.
19. Deal with aggressive behavior by imposing calm, fi rm limits. Control environment and protect others from client’s disruptive behavior. Promotes safety for client and others.
20. Remain composed, place in a quiet environment, providing time out, as indicated, to prevent escalation into panic state and violent behavior
21. Refer to professionals (e.g., social worker, fi nancial resources, mental healthcare provider, minister/spiritual advisor) if serious diffi culties develop (e.g., depression, alcohol or other drug abuse, deteriorating behavior of child) to assist client with special needs and/or persistent problems with adaptation.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Involve client in formulating goals and plan of care when possible. Supports independence and commitment to achieving outcomes.
2. Encourage communication between client/family/SO to provide mutual support and problem-solving opportunities.
3. Discuss benefits of adequate nutrition, rest, and exercise to maintain physical well-being.
4. Involve in anxiety- and stress-reduction activities (e.g., meditation, progressive muscle relaxation, group socialization), as able, to enhance psychological well-being and coping abilities.
5. Encourage participation in activities, hobbies, and personal interactions as appropriate. Promotes creative endeavors, stimulating the mind.
6. Provide client with information and list of local social groups, assistance organizations, or community services (e.g., Welcome Wagon, senior citizens or teen clubs, churches, singles’ groups, sports leagues) to provide contacts for client to develop new relationships and learn more about the new setting.
7. Discuss safety issues regarding new environment (e.g., how to navigate streets or choose correct bus; locate dining hall or bathroom in facility), concerns of elopement or running away. 
8. Anticipate variety of emotions and reactions. May vary from insomnia and loss of appetite to becoming involved with alcohol or other drugs or exacerbation of health problems, onset of serious illness, or behavioral problems. Awareness provides opportunity for timely intervention.
=====

