::Risk For Self Directed Violence::

::Definition::
 Susceptible to behaviors in which an individual demonstrates that he or she can be physically, emotionally, and/or sexually harmful to self.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Determine underlying dynamics as listed in Risk Factors. 
2. Identify conditions such as acute or chronic brain syndrome, panic state, hormonal imbalance (e.g., premenstrual syndrome, postpartal psychosis), drug induced, postanesthesia/postseizure confusion, traumatic brain injury. These physical conditions may interfere with ability to control own behavior and will need specifi c interventions to manage. 
3. Ascertain client’s perception of self and situation. Note use of defense mechanisms (e.g., denial, projection). 
4. Observe and listen for early cues of distress or increasing anxiety (e.g., irritability, lack of cooperation, demanding behavior, body posture or expression). May indicate possibility of loss of control, and intervention at this point can prevent a blowup.
5. Review laboratory findings (e.g., blood alcohol, blood glucose, arterial blood gases, electrolytes, renal function tests). 
6. Observe for signs of suicidal/homicidal intent (e.g., perceived morbid or anxious feeling while with the client; warning from the client: “It doesn’t matter,” “I’d/They’d be better off dead”; mood swings; “accident-prone” or self-destructive behavior; suicidal attempts; possession of alcohol and/or other drug[s] in known substance abuser). (Refer to ND risk for Suicide.) 
7. Note family history of suicidal or homicidal behavior. Children who grow up in homes where violence is accepted tend to grow up to use violence as a means of solving problems.
8. Determine presence, extent, and acceptance of violence in the client’s culture. Youth violence has become a national concern with widely publicized school shootings and an increase in arrests of both boys and girls for violent crimes and weapons violations. Young people who are at risk for violence need to be identifi ed, and positive programs aimed at promoting emotional wellness need to be instituted in schools, parent education meetings, churches, and community centers.
9. Ask directly if the person is thinking of acting on thoughts or feelings to determine violent intent.
10. Determine availability of suicidal means. Identifi es urgency of situation and need to intervene by removing lethal means, possibly hospitalizing client, or instituting other measures to ensure safety of client.
11. Assess client coping behaviors already present. Client may believe there are no alternatives other than violence, especially if individual has come from a family background of violence.
12. Identify risk factors and assess for indicators of child abuse or neglect: unexplained or frequent injuries, failure to thrive, and so forth. 
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist client to accept responsibility for impulsive behavior and potential for violence: 
1. Develop therapeutic nurse-client relationship. Provide consistent caregiver when possible. Promotes sense of trust, allowing client to discuss feelings openly.
2. Maintain straightforward communication to avoid reinforcing manipulative behavior.
3. Discuss motivation for change (e.g., failing relationships, job loss, involvement with judicial system). Crisis situation can provide impetus for change, but requires timely therapeutic intervention to sustain efforts.
4. Help client recognize that client’s actions may be in response to own fear (may be afraid of own behavior or loss of control), dependency, and feeling of powerlessness. 
5. Make time to listen to expressions of feelings. Acknowledge reality of client’s feelings and that feelings are okay. (Refer to ND Self-Esteem [specify].)
6. Confront client’s tendency to minimize situation or behavior. In domestic violence situations, individual may be remorseful after incident and will apologize and say that it won’t happen again.
7. Review factors (feelings and events) involved in precipitating violent behavior. 
8. Discuss impact of behavior on others and consequences of actions.
9. Acknowledge reality of suicide or homicide as an option. Discuss consequences of actions if they were to follow through on intent. Ask how it will help client to resolve problems. Provides an opportunity for client to look at reality of choices and potential outcomes.
10. Accept client’s anger without reacting on emotional basis. Give permission to express angry feelings in acceptable ways and let client know that staff will be available to assist in maintaining control. Promotes acceptance and sense of safety.
11. Help client identify more appropriate solutions or behaviors (e.g., motor activities, exercise) to lessen sense of anxiety and associated physical manifestations.
12. Provide directions for actions client can take, avoiding negatives, such as “Do Nots.” Discussing positive ideas to help client begin to look toward a better future can provide hope that violent behaviors can be changed, promoting feelings of self-worth and belief in control of own self. 
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To assist client in controlling behavior:
1. Contract with client regarding safety of self/others.
2. Be truthful when giving information and dealing with client. Builds trust, enhances therapeutic relationship, prevents manipulative behavior.
3. Identify current and past successes and strengths. Discuss effectiveness of coping techniques used and possible changes. (Refer to ND ineffective Coping.) Client is often not aware of positive aspects of life; once recognized, these can be used as a basis for change.
4. Assist client to distinguish between reality and hallucinations or delusions. Violent behavior in clients with major mental disorders (schizophrenia, mania) may be in response to command hallucinations and may require more aggressive treatment or hospitalization until behavior is under control.
5. Approach in positive manner, acting as if the client has control and is responsible for own behavior. Be aware, though, that the client may not have control, especially if under the influence of drugs (including alcohol).
6. Maintain distance and do not touch client without permission when situation indicates client does not tolerate such closeness (e.g., post-trauma response). 
7. Remain calm and state limits on inappropriate behavior (including consequences) in a firm manner. Calm manner enables client to de-escalate anger, and knowing what the consequences will be gives an opportunity to choose to change behavior and deal appropriately with situation. 
8. Direct client to stay in view of staff/caregiver, when indicated.
9. Administer prescribed medications (e.g., anti-anxiety or antipsychotic), taking care not to oversedate client. The chemistry of the brain is changed by early violence and has been shown to respond to serotonin, as well as related neurotransmitter systems, which play a role in restraining aggressive impulses.
10. Monitor for possible drug interactions, cumulative effects of drug regimen (e.g., anticonvulsants, antidepressants). May be contributing factor in violent behavior.
11. Give positive reinforcement for client’s efforts. Encourages continuation of desired behaviors.
12. Explore death fantasies when expressed (e.g., “I’ll look down and watch them suffer”; “She’ll be sorry”) or the idea that death is not fi nal (e.g., “I can come back”). 
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    -  To assist client/SO(s) to correct/deal with existing situation:
1. Gear interventions to individual(s) involved, based on age, relationship, and so forth.
2. Maintain calm, matter-of-fact, nonjudgmental attitude. Decreases defensive response.
3. Notify potential victims in the presence of serious homicidal threat in accordance with legal and ethical guidelines. Various Tarasoff statutes exist in many states, requiring mental health professionals to report specifi c threats to both the individual named and law enforcement.
4. Discuss situation with abused or battered person, providing accurate information about choices and effective actions that can be taken.
5. Assist individual to understand that angry, vengeful feelings are appropriate in the situation but need to be expressed and not acted on. Helps client accept feelings as natural and begin to learn effective coping skills and promotes sense of control over situation. (Refer to ND Post-Trauma Syndrome, as psychological responses may be similar.)
6. Identify resources available for assistance (e.g., battered women’s shelter, social services).
[Nursing Priority No.5]
    - To promote safety in event of violent behavior:
1. Provide a safe, quiet environment and remove items from the client’s environment that could be used to infl ict harm to self or others. 
2. Maintain distance from client who is striking out or hitting and take evasive and controlling actions, as indicated.
3. Call for additional staff/security personnel. 
4. Approach aggressive or attacking client from the front, just out of reach, in a commanding posture with palms down. 
5. Tell client to STOP in a fi rm voice. This may be suffi cient to help client control own actions.
6. Maintain direct, constant eye contact, when appropriate. 
7. Speak in a low, commanding voice. Tone of voice conveys message of control and concern and can help to calm the client’s anger.
8. Provide client with a sense that caregiver is in control of the situation to provide feeling of safety.
9. Maintain clear route for staff and client and be prepared to move quickly. Safety for all is of prime importance, and staff may need to leave the room to regroup while continuing to protect the client. Take-down needs to be done quickly to gain control of the individual.
10. Hold client, using restraints or seclusion, when necessary, until client regains self-control. Brief period of physical or chemical restraint may be required until client regains control or other therapeutic interventions take effect. 
[Nursing Priority No.6]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Promote client involvement in planning care within limits of situation, allowing for meeting own needs for enjoyment. Individuals often believe they are not entitled to pleasure and good things in their lives and need to learn how to meet these needs.
2. Assist client to learn assertive rather than manipulative, nonassertive, or aggressive behavior. Promotes behaviors that help client to engage in positive social activities with others.
3. Discuss reasons for client’s behavior with SO(s). Determine desire and commitment of involved parties to sustain current relationships. Family members may believe individual is purposefully behaving in angry ways, and understanding underlying reasons for behavior can defuse feelings of anger on their part, leading to willingness to resolve problems.
4. Develop strategies to help parents learn more effective parenting skills (e.g., parenting classes, appropriate ways of dealing with frustrations). Developing positive relationships has a powerful effect on helping children learn impulse control.
5. Identify support systems (e.g., family/friends, clergy). In addition to the client, those around him or her need to learn how to be positive role models and display a broader array of skills for resolving problems.
6. Refer to formal resources, as indicated (e.g., individual or group psychotherapy, substance abuse treatment program, social services, safe house facility, parenting classes).
7. Promote violence prevention and emotional literacy programs in the schools and community. These programs are based on the premise that intelligent management of emotions is critical to successful living. Aggressive youth lack skills in arousal management and nonviolent problem-solving, which can be learned in programs and reinforced by the adults in their lives. 
=====

