::Risk For Sudden infant Death::

::Definition::
 Susceptible to unpredicted death of an infant.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Identify individual risk factors pertaining to situation. Determines modifi able or potentially modifi able factors that can be addressed. Note: According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2015), “1) sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 2) accidental suffocation in a sleeping environment, and 3) other deaths from unknown causes fall under the umbrella of sudden unexpected infant deaths (SUIDs).”
2. Determine ethnic/cultural background of family. Although the overall rate of SUIDS in the United States declined between 1990 and 2015, disparities in risk factors and SUIDs rates remain. The CDC/National Vital statistics system reports (2017) that SUID rates for American Indian/Alaska Native and non-Hispanic black infants were more than twice those of non-Hispanic white infants. SUIDs rates were lowest among Hispanic and Asian/Pacifi c Islander infants.y.
3. Note whether mother smoked during pregnancy or is currently smoking. Smoking is known to negatively affect the fetus prenatally as well as after birth. Some reports indicate an increased risk of SIDS in babies of smoking mothers.
4. Assess extent of prenatal care and extent to which mother followed recommended care measures. Prenatal care is important for all pregnancies to afford the optimal opportunity for all infants to have a healthy start to life.
5. Note use of alcohol or other drugs/medications during and after pregnancy that may have a negative impact on the developing fetus or place the infant at risk for death. Enables management to minimize any damaging effects.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To promote use of activities to minimize risk of SIDS: 
1. Recommend that infant be placed on his or her back to sleep, both at nighttime and naptime. Research confi rms that fewer infants die of SIDS when they sleep on their backs, not on tummy or side.
2. Advise all caregivers of the infant regarding the importance of maintaining safe sleeping position in own sleeping place with head and face uncovered. Anyone who will have responsibility for the care of the child during sleep needs to be reminded of the importance of the back to sleep position.
3.  Encourage parents to schedule “tummy time” only while infant is awake. This activity promotes strengthening of back and neck muscles while parents are close and baby is not sleeping.
4. Encourage early and medically recommended prenatal care and continue with well-baby checkups and immunizations after birth. Include information about signs of premature labor and actions to be taken to avoid problems if possible. Keeping babies healthy prevents problems that could put the infant at risk for SIDS. Immunizing infants prevents many illnesses that can also be life threatening.
5. Encourage breastfeeding, if possible. Recommend sitting up in chair when nursing at night. Breastfeeding has many advantages (e.g., immunological, nutritional, and psychosocial), promoting a healthy infant. Although this does not preclude the occurrence of SIDS, healthy babies are less prone to many illnesses/problems. Note: The risk of the mother falling asleep while feeding infant in bed with resultant accidental suffocation could be of concern.
6. Note cultural beliefs about bedsharing. Bedsharing is more common among breastfed infants, young unmarried mothers, low-income families where multiple people share a bed, or those from a minority group.
7. Discuss safety concerns of bedsharing, recommending roomsharing with parents instead for at least fi rst six months. Injury or death may occur due to accidental entrapment under a sleeping adult or suffocation by becoming wedged in a couch or cushioned chair.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Discuss known facts about SIDS with parents. Corrects misconceptions and helps reduce level of anxiety.
2. Recommend attention to factors below that may help in reducing risk:
 - Avoid overdressing or overheating infants during sleep. Baby should be kept warm, but not too warm. Note: Studies have reported that infants dressed in two or more layers of clothes as they slept had six times the risk of SIDS as those dressed in fewer layers.
 - Place infant on a fi rm mattress in an approved crib. Avoiding soft mattresses, sofas, cushions, waterbeds, and other soft surfaces, while not known to prevent SIDS, will minimize chance of suffocation.
 - Remove crib bumper pads, stuffed toys, and fl uffy and loose bedding from sleep area, making sure baby’s head and face are not covered during sleep. Minimizes possibility of entrapment and suffocation.
 - Provide pacifi er at nap time and bedtime, refraining from placing around neck or attaching to clothing. Specifi c mechanism of action unclear but studies demonstrate decreased incidence of SIDS with use.
 - Verify that day-care center/provider(s) are trained in observation and modifying risk factors (e.g., sleeping position) to reduce risk of death while infant in their care.
3. Discuss the use of apnea monitors. Apnea monitors have
not proved helpful in preventing SIDS but may be used to
monitor other medical problems.
4. Recommend public health nurse or similar resource visit new
mothers at least once or twice following discharge. These
early visit programs have demonstrated an improvement
in infant safety outcomes.
5. Refer parents to local SIDS programs/other resources for learning (e.g., National SIDS/Infant Death Resource Center and similar Web sites) and encourage consultation with healthcare provider if baby shows any signs of illness or behaviors that concern them. Can provide information and support for risk reduction and correction of treatable problems.

=====