::Risk For Decreased Cardiac Tissue Perfusion::

::Definition::
 Susceptible to a decrease in cardiac (coronary) circulation, which may compromise health. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    -  To identify individual risk factors:
1. Note presence of conditions such as congestive heart failure, major trauma with blood loss, recent cardiac surgery or use of ventricular assist device, chronic anemia, sepsis, which can affect systemic circulation, tissue oxygenation, and organ function.
2. Note client’s age and gender when assessing risk for coronaryartery spasm or myocardial infarction. Risk for heart disorders increases with age. Although men are still considered at higher risk for myocardial infarction and experience it earlier in life, the rate of mortality among women with coronary artery disease is rising.
3. Identify lifestyle issues such as obesity, smoking, high cholesterol, excessive alcohol intake, use of drugs such as cocaine, and physical inactivity, which can raise client’s risk for coronary artery disease and impaired cardiac tissue perfusion.
4. Determine presence of breathing problems, such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) with oxygen desaturation, which can produce alveolar hypoventilation, respiratory acidosis and hypoxia, resulting in cardiac dysrhythmias and cardiac dysfunction.
5. Determine if client is experiencing usual degree or prolonged stress or may have underlying psychiatric disorder (e.g., anxiety or panic) that may cause or exacerbate coronary artery disease and affect cardiac function.
6. Review client’s medications to note current use of vasoactive drugs such as amiodarone, dopamine, dobutamine, esmolol, lidocaine, nitroglycerin, vasopressin (not a complete listing) that can exert undesirable side effects, increasing myocardial workload and oxygen consumption.
7. Review diagnostic studies (e.g., electrocardiogram, exercise tolerance tests, myocardial perfusion scan; echocardiogram, bubble echocardiogram; angiography, Doppler ultrasound, chest radiography; oxygen saturation, capnometry, or arterial blood gases; electrolytes, lipid profi le; blood urea nitrogen/creatinine, cardiac enzymes) to identify conditions requiring treatment and/or response to therapies.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To maintain/maximize cardiac perfusion:
1. Investigate reports of chest pain, noting changes in characteristics of pain to evaluate for potential myocardial ischemia or inadequate systemic oxygenation or perfusion of organs. 
2. Monitor vital signs, especially noting blood pressure changes, including hypertension or hypotension, refl ecting systemic vascular resistance problems that alter oxygen consumption and cardiac perfusion.
3. Assess heart sounds and pulses for dysrhythmias. Can be caused by inadequate myocardial or systemic tissue perfusion, electrolyte or acid-base imbalances.
4. Assess for restlessness, fatigue, changes in level of consciousness, increased capillary refi ll time, diminished peripheral pulses, and pale, cool skin. Signs and symptoms of inadequate systemic perfusion, which refl ects cardiac function.
5. Inspect for pallor, mottling, cool or clammy skin, and diminished pulses indicative of systemic vasoconstriction resulting from reduced cardiac output.
6. Investigate reports of difficulty breathing or respiratory rate outside acceptable parameters, which can be indicative of oxygen exchange problems.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To maintain/maximize cardiac perfusion:
1. Collaborate in treatment of underlying conditions such as hypovolemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, chronic atrial fi brillation to correct or treat disorders that could infl uence cardiac perfusion or organ function.
2. Provide supplemental oxygen as indicated to improve or maintain cardiac and systemic tissue perfusion.
3. Administer fluids and electrolytes as indicated to maintain systemic circulation and optimal cardiac function.
4. Administer medications (e.g., antihypertensive agents, analgesics, antidysrhythmics, bronchodilators, fi brinolytic agents) to treat underlying conditions, prevent thromboembolic phenomena, and maintain cardiac tissue perfusion and organ function.
5. Provide periods of undisturbed rest and calming environment to reduce myocardial workload.
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    - To promote heart health (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Discuss cumulative effects of risk factors (e.g., family history, obesity, age, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, clotting disorders) and potential outcomes of atherosclerosis (e.g., systemic and cardiac disease conditions).
2. Review modifiable risk factors to assist client/significant other (SO) in understanding those areas in which he or she can take action or make heart-healthy choices:
 - Recommend maintenance of normal weight or weight loss if client is obese. Review specifi c dietary concerns with client (e.g., reducing animal and dairy fats; increasing plant foods—fruits, vegetables, olive oil, nuts).
 - Encourage smoking cessation, when indicated, offering information about smoking-cessation aids and programs.
 - Encourage client to engage in regular exercise.
 - Discuss cardiac effects of drug use, where indicated (including cocaine, methamphetamines, alcohol).
 - Discuss coping and stress tolerance.
 - Demonstrate and encourage use of relaxation and stress management techniques.
 - Encourage client in high-risk categories (e.g., strong family history, diabetic, prior history of cardiac event) to have regular medical examinations.
3. Review medications on regular basis to manage those that affect cardiac function or those given to prevent blood pressure or thromboembolic problems.
4. Refer to educational/community resources, as indicated. Client/SO may benefit from support to engage in healthier heart activities (e.g., weight loss, smoking cessation, exercise).
5. Instruct in blood pressure monitoring at home, if indicated; advise purchase of home monitoring equipment. Facilitates management of hypertension, a major risk factor for damage to blood vessels, which contributes to coronaryartery disease.
=====

