::Sexual Dysfunction::

::Definition::
 A state in which an individual experiences a change in sexual function during the sexual response phases of desire, excitation, and/or orgasm, which is viewed as unsatisfying, unrewarding, or inadequate. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Perform a complete history and physical, including a sexual history, which would include usual pattern of functioning and level of desire. Note vocabulary used by the individual to maximize communication/understanding. 
2. Have client describe problem in own words. 
3. Determine importance of sex to individual/partner and client’s motivation for change. Both individuals may have differing levels of desire and expectations that may create conflict in relationship.
4. Be alert to comments of client, as sexual concerns are often disguised as humor, sarcasm, and/or offhand remarks.
5. Assess client’s/SO’s knowledge regarding sexual anatomy and function and effects of current situation or condition. Individuals may be ignorant of anatomy of sexual system and how it works, impacting client’s understanding of situation and expectations.
6. Determine preexisting problems that may be factors in current situation (e.g., marital or job stress, role confl icts). Physical conditions (e.g., arthritis, multiple sclerosis (MS), hypertension, diabetes mellitus, fatigue, presence of a colostomy, urinary incontinence) can directly affect sexual functioning, or individual can believe that condition precludes sexual activity, such as recent myocardial infarction or heart surgery.
7. Identify current stress factors in individual situation (e.g., marital or job stress, role confl icts). These factors may be producing enough anxiety to cause depression or other psychological reaction(s) leading to physiological symptoms.
8. Discuss cultural values, religious beliefs, or confl icts present. Client may have anxiety and guilt as a result of family beliefs about sex and genital area of the body because of how sexuality was communicated to the client as he or she was growing up.
9. Determine pathophysiology, illness, surgery, or trauma involved and impact on (perception of) individual/SO. The client may be more concerned about these issues when the sexual parts of the body are involved (e.g., mastectomy, hysterectomy, prostatectomy).
10. Review medication regimen and drug use (prescriptions, over the counter, illegal, alcohol) and cigarette use. Antihypertensives may cause erectile dysfunction; monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclics can cause erection or ejaculation problems and anorgasmia in women; narcotics and alcohol can produce impotence and inhibit orgasm; smoking creates vasoconstriction and may be a factor in erectile dysfunction.
11. Observe behavior and stage of grieving when related to body changes or loss of a body part (e.g., pregnancy, obesity, amputation, mastectomy). 
12. Discuss client’s view of body, if indicated (e.g., concern about penis size, failure with performance; loss of desirability). 
13. Assist with diagnostic studies to determine cause of erectile dysfunction. More than half of the cases have a physical cause such as diabetes, vascular problems. 
14. Explore with client the meaning of client’s behavior. (Masturbation, for instance, may have many meanings or purposes, such as for relief of anxiety, sexual deprivation, pleasure, a nonverbal expression of need to talk, way of alienating.) ( Note: Nurse needs to be aware of and be in control of own feelings and response to client expressions or self-revelation.)
15. Avoid making value judgments, as they do not help the client to cope with the situation.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client/SO to deal with individual situation:
1. Establish therapeutic nurse-client relationship to promote treatment and facilitate sharing of sensitive information and feelings.
2. Assist with treatment of underlying medical conditions, including changes in medication regimen, weight management, and cessation of smoking. Successful treatment/ management of many conditions (e.g., cardiovascular, diabetes, arthritis) can improve sexual functioning. However, some treatments and medications also have deleterious affects on sexual abilities/desire.
3. Provide factual information about individual condition involved (e.g., premature ejaculation, female problems of dyspareunia; low sexual desire). Accurate information promotes informed decision-making.
4. Determine what client wants to know to tailor information to client needs. Note: Information affecting client safety or consequences of actions may need to be reviewed and reinforced. 
5. Encourage and accept expressions of concern, anger, grief, fear. Client needs to talk about these feelings to begin resolution.
6. Assist client to be aware of and deal with stages of grieving for loss or change. 
7. Encourage client to share thoughts and concerns with partner and to clarify values and impact of condition on relationship. 
8. Provide for or identify ways to obtain privacy to allow for sexual expression for individual and/or between partners without embarrassment and/or objections of others.
9. Assist client/SO to problem-solve alternative ways of sexual expression. When client is unable to perform in usual manner, there are many ways the couple can learn to satisfy sexual needs.
10. Provide information about availability of corrective measures such as medication (e.g., papaverine or sildenafi l [Viagra] for erectile dysfunction) or reconstructive surgery (e.g., penile/ breast implants) when indicated.
11. Refer to appropriate resources, as needed (e.g., healthcare coworker with greater comfort level and/or knowledgeable clinical nurse specialist or professional sex therapist, family counseling). Not all professionals are knowledgeable or comfortable dealing with sexual issues, and referrals to more appropriate resources can provide client/couple with accurate assistance.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Provide sex education, explanation of normal sexual functioning when necessary. 
2. Provide written material appropriate to individual needs (include bibliotherapy and reliable Internet resources related to client’s concerns) for reinforcement at client’s leisure and readiness to deal with sensitive materials.
3. Encourage ongoing dialogue and take advantage of teachable moments. Within a therapeutic relationship, comfort is achieved and individual is encouraged to ask questions and be receptive to continuing conversation about sexual issues.
4. Demonstrate and assist client to learn relaxation and/or visualization techniques. Stress is often a component of sexual dysfunction, and using these skills can help with resolution of problems.
5. Encourage client to engage in regular self-examination, as indicated (e.g., breast/testicular examinations). 
6. Identify community resources for further assistance (e.g., Reach for Recovery, CanSurmount, Ostomy Association, family or sex therapist). 
7. Refer for further professional assistance concerning relationship diffi culties, low sexual desire, and other sexual concerns (e.g., premature ejaculation, vaginismus, painful intercourse). 
8. Identify resources for assistive devices or sexual “aids.” 
=====

