::Situational Low Self-Esteem And Risk For Situational Low Self-Esteem::

::Definition::
 - Situational Low Self-Esteem: Development of a negative perception of self-worth in response to a current situation.
 - Risk For Situational Low Self-Esteem: Susceptible to developing a negative perception of self-worth in response to a current situation, which may compromise health.

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Determine individual situation (e.g., family crisis, termination of a relationship, loss of employment, physical disfi gurement) related to low self-esteem in the present circumstances.
2. Identify client’s basic sense of self-esteem and image client has of self: existential, physical, psychological. Each aspect plays a role in the client’s ability to deal with current situation/crisis.
3. Assess degree of threat and perception of client in regard to crisis. One individual views a serious situation as manageable, while another individual may be overly concerned about a minor problem.
4. Ascertain sense of control client has (or perceives self to have) over self and situation. Note client’s locus of control (internal or external). Important in determining whether the client believes he or she has control over the situation or whether one is at the mercy of fate or luck.
5. Assess family/significant other(s) (SO[s]) dynamics and support of client. How family interacts with one another affects not only the development of self-esteem but also the maintenance of a sense of self-worth when client is facing an illness or crisis. Dysfunctional interactions may be detrimental to client’s ability to deal with what is happening. 
6. Determine client’s awareness of own responsibility for dealing with situation, personal growth, and so forth. When client is aware of and accepts own responsibility, may indicate internal locus of control.
7. Verify client’s concept of self in relation to cultural/religious ideals. Cultural and religious infl uences during the individual’s life affect beliefs about self, measure of worth, and ability to deal with current situation or crisis. 
8. Review past coping skills in relation to current episode. 
9. Assess negative attitudes and/or self-talk. An individual who is feeling unimportant, incompetent, and not in control often is unconsciously saying negative things to himself or herself that contribute to a loss of self-esteem and an attitude of despair.
10. Note nonverbal body language. Incongruencies between verbal and nonverbal communication require clarification.
11. Listen for or note self-destructive or suicidal thoughts or behaviors. Indicates high level of stress and need for further evaluation and referral for mental health services. Refer to ND risk for Suicide as appropriate.
12. Identify previous adaptations to illness or disruptive events in life. May be predictive of current outcome.
13. Assess family/SO dynamics and support of client.
14. Note availability and use of resources.  

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To assist client to deal with loss/change and recapture or maintain sense of positive self-esteem:
1. Assist with treatment of underlying condition when possible. For example, cognitive restructuring and improved concentration in mild brain injury often result in restoration of positive self-esteem.
2. Encourage expression of feelings, anxieties. Facilitates grieving the loss.
3. Active-listen client’s concerns and negative verbalizations without judgment. Conveys a message of acceptance and confidence in client’s ability to deal with whatever occurs.
4. Identify individual strengths and assets and aspects of self that remain intact and can be valued. Reinforce positive traits, abilities, self-view. 
5. Help client identify own responsibility and control or lack of control in situation. When able to acknowledge what is out of his or her control, client can focus attention on area of own responsibility.
6. Assist client to problem solve situation, developing plan of action and setting goals to achieve desired outcome. Enhances commitment to plan, optimizing outcomes.
7. Convey confidence in client’s ability to cope with current situation. Validation helps client accept own ability to deal with what is happening.
8. Mobilize support systems. Support systems can provide role modeling and the help needed to engender hope and enhance self-esteem.
9. Provide opportunity for client to practice alternative coping strategies, including progressive socialization opportunities.
10. Encourage use of visualization, guided imagery, and relaxation to promote positive sense of self and coping ability.
11. Provide feedback of client’s self-negating remarks or behavior, using I-messages, to allow the client to experience a different view.
12. Encourage involvement in decisions about care when possible.
13. Give reinforcement for progress noted. Positive words of encouragement promote continuation of efforts, supporting development of coping behaviors.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Encourage client to set long-range goals for achieving necessary lifestyle changes. Supports view that this is an ongoing process.
2. Support independence in activities of daily living or mastery of therapeutic regimen. Confident individual is more secure and positive in self-appraisal.
3. Promote attendance in therapy or support group, as indicated.
4. Involve extended family/SO(s) in treatment plan. Increases likelihood they will provide appropriate support to client.
5. Provide information to assist client in making desired changes. Appropriate books, DVDs, or other resources allow client to learn at own pace.
6. Suggest participation in group or community activities (e.g., assertiveness classes, volunteer work, support groups).

=====