::Social Isolation::

::Definition::
 Aloneness experienced by the individual and perceived as imposed by others and as a negative or threatening state. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing factors:
1. Determine presence of factors as listed in Related Factors and other concerns (e.g., elderly, female, adolescent, ethnic or racial minority, economically/educationally disadvantaged). 
2. Note onset of physical or mental illness and whether recovery is anticipated or condition is chronic or progressive. Individual may withdraw from activities because of own disturbed thoughts, concern about how others view his or her illness, alterations in physical appearance or mental status. Anticipated length of illness may dictate choice of interventions.
3. Perform physical examination, paying particular attention to any illnesses. Individuals who are isolated appear to be susceptible to health problems, especially coronary heart disease, although little is understood about why this is true.
4. Identify blocks to social contacts (e.g., physical immobility, sensory defi cits, housebound, incontinence). Client may be unable to go out, embarrassed to be with others, and reluctant to solve these problems.
5.  Ascertain implications of cultural values or religious beliefs for the client because these impact choice of behaviors and may even script interactions with others.
6. Assess factors in client’s life that may contribute to sense of helplessness (e.g., loss of spouse/parent). Client may withdraw and fail to seek out friends who may have previously been in his or her life.
7. Ascertain client’s perception regarding sense of isolation. Differentiate isolation from solitude and loneliness, which may be acceptable or by choice.
8.  Assess client’s feelings about self, sense of ability to control situation, sense of hope. 
9. Note use and effectiveness of coping skills.
10. Identify support systems available to the client, including presence of and relationship with extended family. 
11. Determine drug use (legal and illicit). Possibility of a relationship between unhealthy behaviors and social isolation or the infl uence others have on the individual.
12. Identify behavior response of isolation (e.g., excessive sleeping or daydreaming, substance use), which also may potentiate isolation.
13. Review history and elicit information about traumatic events that may have occurred. Client who has experienced a traumatic event may withdraw from social contact and suffer from anxiety when faced with having to deal with social situations. (Refer to ND Post-Trauma Syndrome.) 
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    - To alleviate conditions contributing to client’s sense of isolation:
1. Establish therapeutic nurse-client relationship. Promotes trust, allowing client to feel free to discuss sensitive matters.
2. Spend time visiting with client and identify other resources available (e.g., volunteer, social worker, chaplain).
3. Develop plan of action with client: Look at available resources, support risk-taking behaviors to engage in social interactions, management of personal resources, appropriate medical care or self-care, and so forth. Learning to manage issues of daily living can increase self-confi dence and promote comfort in social settings.
4. Introduce client to those with similar or shared interests and other supportive people. Provides role models, encourages problem-solving, and possibly making friends that will relieve client’s sense of isolation.
5. Provide positive reinforcement when client makes move(s) toward others. Encourages continuation of efforts.
6. Provide for placement in sheltered community when necessary.
7. Assist client to problem-solve solutions to short-term or imposed isolation (e.g., communicable disease measures, including compromised host). 
8. Encourage open visitation when possible and/or telephone contacts/social media to maintain involvement with others.
9. Provide environmental stimuli (e.g., open curtains, pictures, TV, and radio). 
10. Promote participation in recreational or special interest activities in setting that client views as safe.
11. Identify foreign language resources, such as interpreter, newspaper, radio programming, as appropriate.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Assist client to learn or enhance skills (e.g., problem-solving, communication, social skills, self-esteem, activities of daily living).
2. Encourage or assist client to enroll in classes, as desired (e.g., assertiveness, vocational, sex education).
3. Involve children and adolescents in age-appropriate programs and activities to promote socialization skills and peer contact.
4. Help client differentiate between isolation and loneliness or aloneness and about ways to prevent slipping into an undesired state. 
5. Involve client in programs directed at correction and prevention of identifi ed causes of problem (e.g., senior citizen services, daily telephone contact, house sharing, pets, day-care centers, religious or spiritual resources). Social isolation seems to be growing and may be related to time stressors, watching TV, prolonged social media use, or fatigue, resulting in individuals fi nding they do not have a close friend they can share intimate thoughts with.
6. Refer to therapists, as appropriate, to facilitate grief work, relationship building, and opportunity to work toward improvement of individual issues affecting social interactions.
7. Discuss use of medications, as indicated. Prescribed medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), can be very effective in treating social disorders.
=====

