::Spiritual Distress And Risk For Spiritual Distress::

::Definition::
 - Spiritual Distress: A state of suffering related to the impaired ability to experience and integrate meaning in life through connections with self, others, the world, or a superior being. 
 - Risk For Spiritual Distress: Susceptible to an impaired ability to experience and integrate meaning and purpose in life through connectedness within self, others, literature, nature, and/or a power greater than oneself, which may compromise health.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To assess causative/contributing or risk factors:
1. Ascertain current situation (e.g., natural disaster, death of a spouse, personal injustice). Identification of circumstances that puts the individual at risk for loss of connectedness with spiritual beliefs is essential to plan for appropriate interventions.
2. Determine client’s religious or spiritual orientation, current involvement, presence of confl icts. Individual spiritual practices or restrictions may affect client care or create confl ict between spiritual beliefs and treatment.
3. Note client’s reason for living and whether it is directly related to situation (e.g., home and business washed away in a fl ood, parent whose only child is terminally ill). Tragic occurrences can cause individual to question previous beliefs or purpose of life.
4. Listen to client’s/signifi cant other’s (SO’s) reports or expressions of concern, anger, alienation from God, belief that illness or situation is a punishment for wrongdoing, and so forth. Suggests need for spiritual advisor to address client’s belief system, if desired.
5. Assess sense of self-concept, worth, ability to enter into loving relationships. Lack of connectedness with self and others impairs client’s ability to trust others or feel worthy of trust from others. Feelings of abandonment may accompany sense of “not being good enough” in face of illness, disaster.
6. Determine sense of futility, feelings of hopelessness and helplessness, lack of motivation to help self. Indicators that client may see no, or only limited, options, alternatives, or personal choices available and lacks energy to deal with situation.
7. Note expressions of inability to fi nd meaning in life, reason for living. Evaluate suicidal ideation. Crisis of the spirit or loss of will to live places client at increased risk for inattention to personal well-being or harm to self.
8. Note recent changes in behavior (e.g., withdrawal from others and creative or religious activities, dependence on alcohol or medications). Helpful in determining severity and duration of situation and possible need for additional referrals, such as substance withdrawal.
9. Observe behavior indicative of poor relationships with others (e.g., manipulative, nontrusting, demanding). Manipulation is used for management of client’s sense of powerlessness because of distrust of others.
10. Ascertain substance use or abuse. Affects ability to deal with problems in a positive manner.
11. Determine support systems available to client/SO(s) and how they are used. Provides insight to client’s willingness to pursue outside resources.
12. Be aware of infl uence of care provider’s belief system. (It is still possible to be helpful to client while remaining neutral and refraining from promoting own beliefs.)
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist client/SO(s) to deal with feelings/situation: 
1. Develop therapeutic nurse client relationship. Ascertain client’s views as to how care provider(s) can be most helpful. Convey acceptance of client’s spiritual beliefs and concerns. Promotes trust and comfort, encouraging client to be open about sensitive matters.
2. Provide calm, peaceful setting when possible. Promotes relaxation and enhances opportunity for refl ection on situation, discussions with others, meditation.
3. Have client identify and prioritize current or immediate needs. Helps client focus on what needs to be done and identify manageable steps to take.
4. Encourage client/family to ask questions. Demonstrates support for individual’s willingness to learn.
5. Review coping skills used and their effectiveness in current situation. Identifies strengths to incorporate into plan and techniques needing revision.
6. Ascertain past coping behaviors to determine approaches used previously that may be more effective in dealing with current situation.
7. Suggest use of journaling. Can assist in clarifying values and ideas or recognizing and resolving feelings or situation.
8. Make time for nonjudgmental discussion of philosophical issues or questions about spiritual impact of illness or situation and/or treatment regimen. Open communication can assist client in reality checks of perceptions and identifying personal options.
9. Problem solve solutions and identify areas for compromise that may be useful in resolving possible conflicts.
10. Set limits on acting-out behavior that is inappropriate or destructive. Promotes safety for client/others and helps prevent loss of self-esteem.
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To facilitate setting goals and moving forward:
1. Involve client in refining healthcare goals and therapeutic regimen, as appropriate. Enhances commitment to plan, optimizing outcomes.
2. Discuss difference between grief and guilt and help client to identify and deal with each. Point out consequences of actions based on guilt. Aids client in assuming responsibility for own actions and avoiding acting out of false guilt.
3. Use therapeutic communication skills of refl ection and activelistening. Helps client fi nd own solutions to concerns.
4. Identify role models (e.g., nurse, individual experiencing similar situation). Provides opportunities for sharing of experiences, fi nding hope, and identifying options to deal with situation.
5. Assist client to learn use of meditation, prayer, and forgiveness to heal past hurts.
6. Provide information that anger with God is a normal part of the grieving process. Realizing these feelings are not unusual can reduce sense of guilt, encourage open expression, and facilitate resolution of conflict.
7. Provide time and privacy to engage in spiritual growth and religious activities (e.g., prayer, meditation, scripture reading, listening to music). Allows client to focus on self and seek connectedness.
8. Encourage and facilitate outings to neighborhood park, nature walks, or similar outings when able. Sunshine, fresh air, and activity can stimulate release of endorphins, promoting sense of well-being.
9. Provide play therapy for child that encompasses spiritual data. Interactive pleasurable activity promotes open discussion and enhances retention of information. Also provides opportunity for child to practice what has been learned.
10. Abide by parents’ wishes in discussing and implementing child’s spiritual support. Limits confusion for child and prevents confl ict of values or beliefs.
11. Refer to appropriate resources (e.g., pastoral or parish nurse, religious counselor, crisis counselor, hospice; psychotherapy; Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous). Useful in dealing with immediate situation and identifying long-term resources for support to help foster sense of connectedness.
12. Refer to NDs ineffective Coping; Powerlessness; SelfEsteem [specify]; Social Isolation; risk for Suicide. 
[Nursing Priority No.4]
    -  To promote spiritual well-being (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Assist client to develop goals for dealing with life/illness situation. Enhances commitment to goal, optimizing outcomes.
2. Encourage life-review by client. Help client fi nd a reason for living. Promotes sense of hope and willingness to continue efforts to improve situation.
3. Role play new coping techniques to enhance integration of new skills or necessary changes in lifestyle.
4. Assist client to identify SO(s) and people who could provide support as needed. Ongoing support is required to enhance sense of connectedness and continue progress toward goals.
5. Encourage family to provide a quiet, calm atmosphere. Be willing to just “be” there and not have a need to “do” something. Helps client to think about self in the context of current situation.
6. Encourage individual to become involved in cultural activities of his or her choosing. Art, music, plays, and other cultural activities provide a means of connecting with self and others.
7. Discuss benefit of family counseling, as appropriate. Issues of this nature (e.g., situational losses, natural disasters, difficult relationships) affect family dynamics.
8. Assist client to identify spiritual resources that could be helpful (e.g., contact spiritual advisor who has qualifi cations or experience in dealing with specifi c problems, such as death and dying, relationship problems, substance abuse, suicide). Can be helpful in fi nding answers to spiritual questions, assisting in the journey of self-discovery, and helping client learn to accept and forgive self. 
=====

