::Stress overload::

::Definition::
 Excessive amounts and types of demands that require action. 

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    - To identify causative/precipitating factors and degree of impairment:
1. Ascertain what tragic/difficult events have occurred (e.g., family violence, death of loved one, chronic or terminal illness, workplace stress or loss of job, catastrophic natural or man-made event) over remote and recent past to assist in determining number, duration, and intensity of events causing perception of overwhelming stress.
2. Ascertain other life events that have recently occurred (e.g., job promotion, moving to different home, getting married/divorced, having a new baby or adding other new family member, traveling, spending holidays with relatives) over recent months. All such changes, even when desired, can be stressful and can evoke stress reactions. 
3.  Evaluate client’s report of physical or emotional problems (e.g., fatigue, aches and pains, irritable bowel, skin rashes, frequent colds, sleeplessness, crying spells, anger, feeling overwhelmed or numb, compulsive behaviors) that can be representing body’s response to stress.
4. Determine client’s/significant other’s (SO’s) understanding of events, noting differences in viewpoints. 
5. Note client’s gender, age, and developmental level of functioning. Although everyone experiences stress and stressors,   women, children, young adults, divorced and separated persons, and persons in roles or occupations requiring constant multitasking tend to have higher stress-related symptoms. Multiple stressors can weaken the immune system and tax physical and emotional coping mechanisms in persons of any age, but particularly the elderly.
6. Note cultural values, religious beliefs, and expectations placed on client by SO(s)/family. . They may affect client’s expectation for self in dealing with situation, as well as ability to ask for help from others.
7. Identify client locus of control: internal (expressions of responsibility for self and ability to control outcomes: “I didn’t quit smoking”) or external (expressions of lack of control over self and environment: “Nothing ever works out”). Knowing client’s locus of control will help in developing aplan of care refl ecting client’s ability to realistically make changes that will help to manage stress better.
8. Assess emotional responses and coping mechanisms being used.
9. Determine stress feelings and self-talk client is engaging in. Negative self-talk, all-or-nothing or pessimistic thinking, exaggeration, or unrealistic expectations all contribute to stress overload. 
10. Assess degree of mastery client has exhibited in life. Passive individual may have more diffi culty being assertive and standing up for rights.
11. Determine presence or absence and nature of resources (e.g., whether family/SO(s) are supportive, lack of money, problems with relationship or social functioning). 
12. Note change in relationships with SO(s). Conflict in the family, loss of a family member, divorce can result in a change in support client is accustomed to and impair ability to manage situation.
13. Evaluate stress level, using appropriate tool (e.g., Stress & Depression, Self-Assessment Tool) to help identify areas of most distress. While most stress seems to come from disastrous events in individual’s life, positive events can also be stressful.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
    -  To assist client to deal with current situation:
1. Active-listen concerns and provide empathetic presence, using talk and silence as needed. 
2. Provide for or encourage restful environment where possible. 
3. Discuss situation or condition in simple, concise manner. Devote time for listening. May help client express emotions, grasp situation, and feel more in control.
4. Deal with the immediate issues fi rst (e.g., treatment of acute physical or psychological illness, meet safety needs, removal from traumatic or violent environment). 
5. Assist client in determining whether he or she can change stressor or response. May help client to sort out things over which he or she has control and/or determine responses that can be modifi ed.
6. Allow client to react in own way without judgment. Provide support and diversion as indicated. 
7. Help client to focus on strengths, to set limits on actingout behaviors, and to learn ways to express emotions in an acceptable manner. Promotes internal locus of control, enabling client to maintain self-concept and feel more positive about self.
8. Discuss benefi ts of a “Stop Doing” in place of a “To Do” list. May help client identify and take action regarding energy drainers (e.g., internalizing others’ criticism, fragmented boundaries, power struggles, unprotected personal time) in order to make room for what energizes and brings him or her closer to achieving goals.
9. Address use of ineffective or dangerous coping mechanisms (e.g., substance use or abuse, self-/other-directed violence) and refer for counseling as indicated.
10. Collaborate in treatment of underlying conditions (e.g., traumatic injury, chronic or terminal illness, hormone imbalance, depression and other psychiatric disorders). 

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    - To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
1. Use client’s locus of control to develop individual plan of care (e.g., for client with internal control, encourage client to take control of own care; for those with external control, begin with small tasks and add as tolerated).
2. Incorporate strengths, assets, and past coping strategies that were successful for client. Reinforces that client is able to deal with diffi cult situations.
3. Provide information about stress and exhaustion phase, which occurs when person is experiencing chronic or unresolved stress. Release of cortisol can contribute to reduction in immune function, resulting in physical illness, mental disability, and life dysfunction.
4. Review stress management and coping skills that client can use:
 - Practice behaviors that may help reduce negative consequences—change thinking by focusing on positives, reframing thoughts, changing lifestyle.
 - Take a step back, simplify life; learn to say “no” to reduce sense of being overwhelmed.
 - Learn to control and redirect anger.
 - Develop and practice positive self-esteem skills.
 - Rest, sleep, and exercise to recuperate and rejuvenate self.
 - Participate in self-help actions (e.g., deep breathing and other relaxation exercises, fi nd time to be alone, get involved in recreation or desired activity, plan something fun, develop humor) to actively relax.
 - Eat nutritious meals; avoid junk food, excessive caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine to support general health.

=====