::Acute Substance Withdrawal Syndrome/risk For Acute Substance Withdrawal Syndrome::


::Definition::
Acute Substance Withdrawal Syndrome: Serious multifactorial sequelae following abrupt cessation of an addictive compound

risk for Acute Substance Withdrawal Syndrome: Susceptible to experiencing serious multifactorial sequelae following abrupt cessation of an addictive compound

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1]
    To determine degree of impairment/compromise:
1. Identify comorbidities—medical conditions/psychiatric disorders and currently prescribed medications. Underlying conditions are compounded by withdrawal, suggesting additional testing, monitoring, and potential treatment needs.
2. Determine if naloxone (Narcan) was administered, how many times, and time of last dose. Used to reverse opioid overdose but duration of action of some opioids may exceed that of Narcan, requiring repeat doses.
3. Review toxicology results of urine and blood. To determine substances used, necessary interventions, and potential complications. Note: Symptoms and timing of occurrence depend on type of substance(s) used and last dose.
4. Assess level of consciousness, ability to speak, and response to commands. Speech may be garbled, confused, or slurred. Response to commands may reveal inability to concentrate, impaired judgement, or muscle coordination deficits.
5. Determine stage of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS) using Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for AlcoholRevised (CIWA-Ar) tool. AWS usually begins 3 to 36 hours after last drink. Helps determine appropriate care setting and specific interventions. Note: In presence of substantial language barrier or absence of reliable history, an alternate tool such as Prediction of Alcohol Withdrawal Severity Scale (PAWSS) may be more appropriate. 
6. Observe for behavioral responses such as hyperactivity, disorientation, confusion, sleeplessness, irritability. Hyperactivity related to CNS disturbances may escalate rapidly. Sleep deprivation may aggravate disorientation or confusion. Progression of symptoms may indicate impending hallucinations or delirium tremens (DTs) in alcohol withdrawal.
7. Auscultate breath sounds, noting adventitious sounds such as rhonchi, wheezes, crackles. Client is at risk for atelectasis related to hypoventilation and pneumonia.
8. Review chest x-ray, arterial blood gas (ABG), or pulse oximetry. Respiratory compromise common, e.g., right lower lobe pneumonia common in alcohol-debilitated clients and is often due to chronic aspiration.
9. Measure weight and compare to usual weight and norms for age and body size. Note skin turgor, status of mucous membranes, muscle tone/wasting, presence of edema. Substance abuse is often associated with malnutrition.
10. Review serum nutritional studies, e.g., albumin, transferrin, prealbumin, iron, liver function, electrolytes, hemoglobin, hematocrit. Substance users are often malnourished, impacting organ function, energy/endurance level, immune status, general well-being.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
     To facilitate safe withdrawal from substance:
1. Consult with medical toxicologist or regional poison control center as needed. Useful resources for diagnosis and management of acute/critically ill clients, especially those with multisubstance use.
2. Provide environmental safety as indicated, e.g., bed in low position, call device within reach, doors full open or closed position, padded side rails, family member or sitter at bedside, as appropriate.
3. Monitor vital signs (VS) and level of consciousness (LOC) frequently during acute withdrawal. VS and LOC can be labile based on specific substance(s) and length of time since last used.
4. Elevate head of bed. Decreases potential for aspiration and lowers diaphragm, enhancing lung expansion.
5. Monitor respiratory rate, depth, and pattern. Toxicity levels may change rapidly, e.g., hyperventilation common during acute alcohol withdrawal phase, or marked respiratory depression can occur because of CNS depressant effects of substance used.
6. Administer supplemental oxygen, as needed. Hypoxia may occur with respiratory depression and chronic anemia.
7. Monitor body temperature. Elevation may occur because of sympathetic stimulation. dehydration, and/or infection, causing vasodilation and compromising venous return and cardiac output.
8. Record intake/output, 24-hour fl uid balance; skin turgor, status of mucous membranes. Preexisting dehydration, nausea/vomiting, diuresis, and diaphoresis may compromise cardiovascular function as well as renal perfusion, impacting drug clearance.
9. Administer fluid/electrolytes as indicated. Depending on substances used, client is susceptible to excessive fluid losses and electrolyte imbalances, especially potassium and magnesium, which can result in life-threatening dysrhythmias.
10. Reorient frequently to person, place, time, and surrounding environment. May have calming effect and limit misinterpretation of external stimuli.
11. Encourage client to verbalize anxiety. Explain substance withdrawal increases anxiety and uneasiness. Anxiety may be physiologically or environmentally caused, and client may be unable to identify and/or accept what is happening. Note: Individuals with alcohol use disorders often also have posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
12. Monitor for suicidal tendencies. May need to use emergency commitments or legal hold for client’s safety once medically stable.
13. Provide symptom management as indicated. Medications for nausea/vomiting, anxiety, trembling/“shakes,” insomnia, seizure activity promote comfort and facilitate recovery.
14. Administer medications treating specifi c substance(s) used. For example, beta-adrenergic blockers may speed up the alcohol withdrawal process but are not useful in preventing seizures or DTs, and methadone is used to assist opioid withdrawal. Note: There are no U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved medications for treating cannabis, cocaine, or methamphetamine and medicationassisted treatments (MATs) are rarely used to treat adolescent alcohol use (NIDA, 2014).
15. Administer thiamine, vitamins C and B complex as indicated. Vitamin defi ciency, especially thiamine, is associated with ataxia, loss of eye movement and pupillary response, palpitations, postural hypotension, and exertional dyspnea. 
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    To promote long-term sobriety:
1. Develop trusting relationship, project an accepting attitude about substance use. Provides client with a sense of humanness, helping to decrease paranoia and distrust. (Client will be able to detect biased or condescending attitude of caregivers, negatively impacting relationship.)
2. Determine understanding of current situation. Provides information about degree of denial, acceptance of personal responsibility, and commitment to change.
3. Arrange “intervention” or confrontation in controlled setting when client sufficiently recovered from withdrawal to address addiction issues. Client is more likely to contract for treatment while still hurting from last substance use episode.
4. Confront use of defensive behaviors—denial, projection, and rationalization. Helps client accept the reality of the problems as they exist.
5. Identify individual triggers for substance use (e.g., exhaustion, loneliness/isolation, depression) and client’s plans for living without drugs/alcohol. Provides opportunity to discuss substance tension-reducing strategies, and to develop and refine plan.
6. Use crisis intervention technique to initiate behavior changes. Calming effect enables client to be receptive to care and therapeutic interventions.
7. Instruct in use of relaxation skills, guided imagery, and visualization techniques. Helps client relax and develop new ways to deal with stress and to problem-solve.
8. Facilitate visit by a group member/possible sponsor as appropriate, such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous (NA), Crystal Methamphetamine Anonymous (CMA), Smart Recovery. Puts client in direct contact with support system necessary for managing sobriety and drug-free life.
9. Administer antipsychotic medications as necessary. May be indicated for prolonged or profound psychosis following lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) or phencyclidine (PCP) intoxication.
10. Engage entire family in multidimensional family therapy as indicated. Program developed for adolescents with SUDs and their families to address the various infl uences on client’s substance use by improving family functioning and collaboration with other systems such as school and juvenile justice.





=====