::Risk for Impaired Attachment::

::Definition::
Susceptible to disruption of the interactive process between parent/significant other and child that fosters the development of a protective and nurturing reciprocal relationship. 

::Action/Interventions::

[Nursing Priority No. 1] 
    To identify causative/contributing factors:
1. Interview parents, noting their perception of situation and individual concerns. Identifies problem areas and strengths to formulate appropriate plans.
2. Assess parent/child interactions. Identifying the way in which the family responds to one another is crucial in determining the need for and type of interventions required.
3. Assess parenting skill level, considering intellectual, emotional, and physical strengths and limitations. Identifies areas of need for further education, skill training, and factors that might interfere with ability to assimilate new information.
4. Ascertain availability and use of resources to include extended family, support groups, and financial resources. Lack of support from or presence of extended family, lack of involvement in groups (e.g., church) or specific resources (e.g., La Leche League), and financial stresses can affect family negatively, interfering with ability to deal effectively with parenting responsibilities.
5. Determine emotional and behavioral problems of the child. Attachment-disordered children are unable to give and receive love and affection, defy parental rules and authority, creating ongoing stress and turmoil in the family.
6. Evaluate parents’ ability to provide protective environment and participate in a reciprocal relationship. The ways in which the parent responds to the child are critical to the child’s development, and interventions need to be directed at helping the parents to deal with their own issues and learn positive parenting skills.
7. Note attachment behaviors between parent and child(ren), recognizing cultural background. Behaviors such as eyeto-eye contact, use of enface position, and talking to the infant in a high-pitched voice are indicative of attachment behaviors in American culture but may not be practiced in another culture.

[Nursing Priority No. 2]
     To enhance behavioral organization of the infant/child:
1. Identify the infant’s strengths and vulnerabilities. Each child is born with his or her own temperament that affects interactions with caregivers.
2. Educate parents regarding child growth and development, where indicated, addressing parental perceptions. This helps to clarify realistic or unrealistic expectations.
3. Assist parents in modifying the environment. The environment can be changed to provide appropriate stimulation (e.g., to diminish stimulation before bedtime, to simplify when the environment is too complex to handle, to provide life space where the child can play unrestricted, resulting in freedom for the child to meet his or her needs). (Refer to ND readiness for enhanced organized infant Behavior.)
4. Model caregiving techniques that best support behavioral organization.
5. Respond consistently with nurturing to infant/child. Babies signal their needs by crying; when parents respond to these signals, they develop a sensitivity that in turn develops parental intuition, providing infants with gratification of their needs and trust in their environment.

[Nursing Priority No.3]
    To enhance best functioning of parents:
1. Develop a therapeutic nurse-client relationship. Provide a consistently warm, nurturing, and nonjudgmental environment.
2. Assist parents in identifying and prioritizing family strengths and needs. Promotes a positive attitude by looking at what they already do well and using those skills to address needs.
3. Support and guide parents in the process of assessing resources.
4. Involve parents in activities with the child that they can accomplish successfully. Promotes a sense of confidence, thus enhancing self-concept.
5. Recognize and provide positive feedback for nurturing and protective parenting behaviors. Reinforces the continuation of desired behaviors.
6. Minimize the number of professionals on the team with whom parents must have contact to foster trust in relationships.
=====