::Anxiety: mild, moderate, severe, panic::

::Definition::
Vague uneasy feeling of discomfort or dread accompanied by an autonomic response (the source is often nonspecific or unknown to the individual); a feeling of apprehension caused by anticipation of danger. It is an alerting sign that warns of impending danger and enables the individual to take measures to deal with that threat.

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
To assess level of anxiety:
1. Review familial and physiological factors (e.g., genetic depressive factors), psychiatric illness, active medical conditions (e.g., thyroid problems, metabolic imbalances, cardiopulmonary disease, anemia, or dysrhythmias), and recent/ongoing stressors (e.g., family member illness or death, spousal confl ict/abuse, or loss of job). These factors can cause/exacerbate anxiety and anxiety disorders.
2. Determine current prescribed medications and recent drug history of prescribed or over-the-counter (OTC) medications (e.g., steroids, thyroid preparations, weight loss pills, or caffeine). These medications can heighten feelings and sense of anxiety.
3. Identify the client’s perception of the threat represented by the situation. Distorted perceptions of the situation may magnify feelings. Understanding client’s point of view promotes a more accurate plan of care.
4. Note cultural factors that may infl uence anxiety. Individual responses are infl uenced by cultural values and beliefs and culturally learned patterns of their family of origin.
5. Monitor vital signs (e.g., rapid or irregular pulse, rapid breathing/hyperventilation, changes in blood pressure, diaphoresis, tremors, or restlessness) to identify physical responses associated with both medical and emotional conditions.
6. Observe behaviors that can point to the client’s level of anxiety:
[Mild]
-- Alert, more aware of environment, attention focused on environment and immediate events
-- Restless; irritable; wakeful; reports of insomnia
-- Motivated to deal with existing problems in this state
[Moderate]
-- Perception narrower, concentration increased, able to ignore distractions in dealing with problem(s)
-- Voice quivers or changes pitch
-- Trembling, increased pulse/respirations
- Severe
-- Range of perception is reduced, anxiety interferes with effective functioning
-- Preoccupied with feelings of discomfort, sense of impending doom
-- Increased pulse/respirations with reports of dizziness, tingling
sensations, headaches, and so forth
[Panic]
-- The ability to concentrate is disrupted; behavior is disintegrated; and the client distorts the situation and does not have realistic perceptions of what is happening. The client may be experiencing terror or confusion or be unable to speak or move (paralyzed with fear).
- Note reports of insomnia or excessive sleeping, limited/avoidance of interactions with others, and use of alcohol or other drugs that can be abused, which may be behavioral indicators of use of withdrawal to deal with problems.
- Review results of diagnostic tests (e.g., drug screens, cardiac testing, complete blood count, and chemistry panel), which may point to physiological sources of anxiety.
- Be aware of defense mechanisms being used (e.g., denial or regression) that interfere with ability to deal with problem.
- Identify coping skills the individual is currently using, such as anger, daydreaming, forgetfulness, overeating, smoking, or lack of problem solving.
- Review coping skills used in the past to determine those that might be helpful in current circumstances.
[Nursing Priority No. 2]
To assist client with identifying feelings and beginning to deal with problems:
1. Establish a therapeutic relationship, conveying empathy and unconditional positive regard. Note : The nurse needs to be aware of his or her own feelings of anxiety or uneasiness, exercising care to avoid the contagious effect or transmission of anxiety.
2. Be available to the client for listening and talking. Establishes rapport, promotes expression of feelings, and helps client/signifi cant other look at realities of the illness or treatment without confronting issues they are not ready to deal with.
3. Encourage the client to acknowledge and to express feelings,
such as crying (sadness), laughing (fear or denial), or swearing (fear or anger).
4. Assist the client in developing self-awareness of verbal and nonverbal behaviors. Becoming aware helps client to control these behaviors and begin to deal with issues that are causing anxiety.
5. Clarify the meanings of feelings and actions by providing feedback and checking meaning with the client.
6. Acknowledge anxiety/fear. Do not deny or reassure client that everything will be all right. Validates reality of feelings. False reassurances may be interpreted as lack of understanding or dishonesty, further isolating client.
7. Provide accurate information about the situation. This helps the client identify what is reality based.
8. Be truthful, avoid bribing, and provide physical comfort (e.g., hugging or rocking) when dealing with a child to soothe fears and provide assurance.
9. Provide comfort measures (e.g., calm/quiet environment, soft music, a warm bath, or a back rub).
10. Modify procedures as much as possible (e.g., substitute oral for intramuscular medications or combine blood draws/use finger-stick method) to limit the degree of stress and avoid overwhelming a child or anxious adult.
11 Manage environmental factors, such as harsh lighting and high traffic flow, which may be confusing and stressful to older individuals.
12. Accept the client as is. The client may need to be where he or she is at this point in time, such as in denial after receiving the diagnosis of a terminal illness.
13. Allow the behavior to belong to the client; do not respond personally. The nurse may respond inappropriately, escalating the situation to a nontherapeutic interaction.
14. Assist the client to use anxiety for coping with the situation, if helpful. Moderate anxiety heightens awareness and permits the client to focus on dealing with problems.
5. Panic
-- Stay with client, maintaining a calm, confi dent manner.
- Speak in brief statements using simple words.
- Provide for nonthreatening, consistent environment/atmosphere. Minimize stimuli. Monitor visitors and interactions
to lessen the effect of transmission of feelings.
- Set limits on inappropriate behavior and help the client to
develop acceptable ways of dealing with anxiety.
NOTE: Staff may need to provide safe controls and environment
until client regains control.
- Gradually increase activities/involvement with others as
anxiety is decreased.
- Use cognitive therapy to focus on or correct faulty catastrophic interpretations of physical symptoms.
- Administer medications (anti-anxiety agents/sedatives), as
ordered. 
[Nursing Priority No.3]
    To provide measures to comfort and aid client to handle problematic situations:
1. Provide comfort measures (e.g., calm or quiet environment, soft music, warm bath, back rub, Therapeutic Touch). Aids in meeting basic human need, decreasing sense of isolation, and assisting client to feel less anxious. 
2. Modify procedures as necessary (e.g., substitute oral for intramuscular medications, combine blood draws or use finger-stick method). Limits degree of stress and avoids overwhelming child or anxious adult.
3. Accept client as is. The client may need to be where he or she is at this point in time, such as in denial after receiving the diagnosis of a terminal illness.
4. Allow the behavior to belong to the client; do not respond personally.
5. Assist client to use anxiety for coping with the situation if helpful. Moderate anxiety heightens awareness and can help client to focus on dealing with problems.
6. Encourage awareness of negative self-talk and discuss replacing with positive statements, such as using “can” instead of “can’t,” etc.
  -- To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations):
    1. Assist the client in identifying precipitating factors and new methods of coping with disabling anxiety.
    2. Review happenings, thoughts, and feelings preceding the anxiety attack.
    3. Identify actions and activities the client has previously used to cope successfully when feeling nervous/anxious.
    4. List helpful resources and people, including available “hotline” or crisis managers to provide ongoing/timely support.
    5. Encourage the client to develop an exercise/activity program, which may serve to reduce the level of anxiety by relieving tension.
    6. Assist in developing skills (e.g., awareness of negative thoughts, saying “Stop,” and substituting a positive thought) to eliminate negative self-talk. Mild phobias tend to respond well to behavioral therapy.
    7. Review strategies, such as role-playing, use of visualizations to practice anticipated events, and prayer/meditation. This is useful for being prepared for/dealing with anxietyprovoking situations.
    8. Review medication regimen and possible interactions, especially with OTC drugs, other prescription drugs, and alcohol. Discuss appropriate drug substitutions, changes in dosage, or time of dose to minimize side effects.
    9. Refer to the physician for drug management alteration of the prescription regimen. Drugs that often cause symptoms of anxiety include aminophylline/theophylline, anticholinergics, dopamine, levodopa, salicylates, and steroids.
    10. Refer to individual and/or group therapy, as appropriate, to deal with chronic anxiety states.

=====================================================::Disturbed Body Image::

::Definition::
Confusion in [and/or dissatisfaction with] mental picture of one's physical self. 

::Action/Interventions::
[Nursing Priority No. 1]
-To assess causative/contributing factors: 
1. Discuss pathophysiology present and/or situation affecting the individual and refer to additional NDs as appropriate. For example, when alteration in body image is related to neurological deficit (e.g., cerebrovascular accident—CVA), refer to ND Unilateral Neglect; in the presence of severe, ongoing pain, refer to ND chronic Pain; or in loss of sexual desire/ability, refer to ND Sexual Dysfunction. 
2. Determine whether the condition is permanent with no expectation for resolution (may be associated with other NDs, such as Self-Esteem [specify] or risk for impaired Attachment, when child is affected). There is always something that can be done to enhance acceptance, and it is important to hold out the possibility of living a good life with the disability.
3. Assess mental and physical influence of illness or condition on the client’s emotional state (e.g., diseases of the endocrine system or use of steroid therapy). Some diseases or conditions can have a profound effect on one’s emotions and need to be considered in the evaluation and treatment of the individual’s behavior and reaction to the current situation.
4. Evaluate the level of the client’s knowledge of and anxiety related to the situation. Observe emotional changes, which may indicate acceptance or nonacceptance of the situation.
5. Recognize behavior indicative of overconcern with the body and its processes. May interfere with ability to engage in therapy and indicate need to provide interventions to deal with concern before beginning therapy.
6. Have the client describe self, noting what is positive and what is negative. Be aware of how the client believes others see self. Identifi es self-image and whether there is a discrepancy between own view, how client’s view is affected by social media, or how client believes others see him or her, which may have an effect on how client perceives changes that have occurred.
7. Discuss the meaning of loss/change to the client. A small (seemingly trivial) loss may have a big impact (e.g., the use of a urinary catheter or enema for continence). A change in function (e.g., immobility in elderly) may be more difficult for some to deal with than a change in appearance. The change could be devastating (e.g., permanent facial scarring of child).
8. Use developmentally appropriate communication techniques 
9. for determining exact expression of body image in a child (e.g., puppet play or constructive dialogue for toddler). 
10. Developmental capacity must guide interaction to gain accurate information.
11. Note signs of grieving or indicators of severe or prolonged depression to evaluate need for counseling and/or medications.
12. Determine ethnic background and cultural and religious perceptions or considerations. Understanding how these factors affect the individual in this situation and how they may influence how individual deals with what has happened is necessary to develop appropriate intervention.
13. Identify social aspects of illness or condition (e.g., sexually transmitted diseases, sterility, or chronic conditions), may affect how client views self and functions in social settings as well as how others view the client.
14. Observe interaction of client with signifi cant other (SOs). Distortions in body image may be unconsciously reinforced by family members, and/or secondary gain issues may interfere with progress.
[Nursing Priority No. 2] 
-To determine coping abilities and skills: 
1. Assess the client’s current level of adaptation and progress. 
2. Listen to the client’s comments and responses to the situation. Different situations are upsetting to different people, depending on individual coping skills and past experiences.
3. Note withdrawn behavior and the use of denial. This may be a normal response to a situation or may be indicative of mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia). (Refer to ND ineffective Denial.) 
4. Note dependence on prescription medications or use of addictive substances, such as alcohol or other drugs, which may refl ect dysfunctional coping.
5. Identify previously used coping strategies and effectiveness. 
6. Determine individual/family/community resources available to the client. 
[Nursing Priority No. 3]
-To assist client and SO(s) to deal with/accept issues of self-concept related to body image: 
1. Establish a therapeutic nurse-client relationship, conveying an attitude of caring and developing a sense of trust. 
2. Visit the client frequently and acknowledge the individual as someone who is worthwhile. This provides opportunities for listening to concerns and questions.
3. Assist in correcting underlying problems to promote optimal healing and adaptation.
4. Provide assistance with self-care needs as necessary, while promoting individual abilities and independence. Client may need support to achieve the goal of independence and positive return to managing own life.
5. Work with the client’s self-concept, avoiding moral judgments regarding client’s efforts or progress (e.g., “You should be progressing faster”; “You’re weak or not trying hard enough”). Positive reinforcement encourages the client to continue efforts and strive for improvement.
6. Discuss concerns about fear of mutilation, prognosis, or rejection when the client is facing surgery or a potentially poor outcome of procedure/illness, to address realities and provide emotional support.
7. Acknowledge and accept feelings of dependency, grief, and hostility. 
8. Encourage verbalization of and role-play anticipated confl icts to enhance the handling of potential situations.
9. Encourage the client and SO(s) to communicate feelings to each other. 
10. Assume all individuals are sensitive to changes in appearance, but avoid stereotyping. Not all individuals react to body changes in the same way, and it is important to determine how this person is reacting to changes.
11. Alert the staff to monitor their own facial expressions and other nonverbal behaviors, because they need to convey acceptance and not revulsion when the client’s appearance is affected.
12. Encourage family members to treat the client normally and not as an invalid. 
13. Encourage the client to look at/touch affected body part to begin to incorporate changes into body image.
13. Allow the client to use denial without participating (e.g., client may at fi rst refuse to look at a colostomy; the nurse says, “I am going to change your colostomy now” and proceeds with the task). This provides the individual with time to adapt to the situation.
14. Set limits on maladaptive behavior and assist the client to identify positive behaviors. Self-esteem will be damaged if client is allowed to continue behaviors that are destructive or not helpful, and adaptation to new image will be delayed.
15. Provide accurate information as desired/requested. Reinforce previously given information. 
16. Discuss the availability of prosthetics, reconstructive surgery, and physical/occupational therapy or other referrals as dictated by the individual situation. Provides hope that situation is not impossible and the future does not look so bleak.
17. Help the client select and use clothing or makeup to minimize body changes and enhance appearance.
18. Discuss the reasons for infectious isolation and treatment procedures when used and make time to sit down and talk/listen to the client while in the room to decrease the sense of isolation/loneliness.
[Nursing Priority No. 4] 
-To promote wellness (Teaching/Discharge Considerations): 
1. Begin counseling/other therapies (e.g., biofeedback or relaxation) as soon as possible to provide early/ongoing sources of support.
2. Provide information at the client’s level of acceptance and in small segments to allow easier assimilation. Clarify misconceptions. Reinforce explanations given by other health team members. 
3. Include the client in the decision-making process and problem-solving activities. 
4. Assist the client in incorporating the therapeutic regimen into activities of daily living (e.g., including specifi c exercises and housework activities). Promotes continuation of a program by helping client see that progress can be made within own daily activities.
5. Identify/plan for alterations to home and work environment/activities to accommodate individual needs and support independence.
6. Assist the client in learning strategies for dealing with feelings and venting emotions. 
7. Offer positive reinforcement for efforts made (e.g., wearing makeup or using a prosthetic device). 
8. Refer to appropriate support groups. 

=====================================================